---
title: Custom Types, String Functions & Storage Classes
tags: COMP281 Lectures
---
## `struct`
`struct` is a **user-defined** datatype. It is used to **construct complex datatypes** from existing ones.

### `struct` Syntax

```c
struct [struct_tag] {
	/* member variable 1 */
	/* member variable 2 */
	/* member variable 3 */
}[struct_variables];	// <-- remember the semicolon
```

* `struct_tag` - The name for the structure (optional).

You can then define a `struct` like so:

```c
struct Employee {
	char name[50];
	int age;
	char gender;
	float salary;
} employee1, employee2;
```

### Accessing `struct` Members
To assign a value to a `struct` member, the member name must be liked with the **struct variable** using  a dot `.` operator:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

struct Lecturer {
	char name[50];
	char *room[20];
	int age;
};

int main() {
	struct Lecturer lec;
	strcpy(lec.name, "Phil Jimmieson");
	*lec.room = "Ashton 1.20";
	printf("Name: %s\n", lec.name);
	printf("Room: %s\n", *lec.room);
	return 0;
}
```

Be aware that you cannot assign structure **arrays** in the normal way. Either use `strcpy` or use pointers.
{:.error}

You can also initialise the struct like so:

```c
struct Lecturer lec = {"Phil Jimmieson", "Ashton 1.20", 69};
```

This way you don't have to mess with array types.
{:.info}

### Array of `struct`
You can initialise arrays of `struct`s in the normal way:

```c
struct Lecturer lec[4];
lec[0] = {"Phil Jimmieson", "Ashton 1.20", 69};
```

### Nested `struct`

```c
struct Student {
	char[30] anme;
	int age;
	struct Address {
		char[50] locality;
		char[50] city;
		int pincode;
	} addr;
};
```

### Pointers to `struct`

```c
#include <stdio.h>

struct point {
	int x;
	int y;
	double dist;
};

void init_point(struct point *p) {
	/* Normal Way */
	(*p).x = (*p).y = 0;
	(*p).dist = 0.0;
	
	/* Syntactic Sugar */
	p->x = p->y = 0;
	p->dist = 0.0;
}

int main() {
	struct point p;	// allocate structure
	struct point *pt = &p;	// allocate pointer to struc
	init_point(pt);
	printf("x=%d\n", pt->x);
	return 0;
}
```

## `typedef`
`typedef` allows us to assign **alternative names** to existing datatypes.

### Defining a `typedef`
The syntax takes the following form:

```c
typedef <existing_name> <alias_name>
```

For example, we can use this to shorten double-barrelled types:

```c
typedef unsigned long ulong;
```

We can also use this in conjunction with `struct` to define **new types**:

```c
typedef struct { // no name is used
	int x;
	int y;
	double dist;
} Point, *pointPtr
```

From this we now have:

* A new datatype called `Point`.
* A new type of pointer to the custom type called `pointPtr`.

We can also use it to give an **alias for pointers** to a type:

```c
typedef int* IntPtr;
IntPtr x, y, z;
```

## `union`
`union` is a special datatype allowing us to store different datatypes in the same physical memory location. A union can have **many members** by only **one member** can **contain a value** at any given time.

### `union` Syntax
The syntax of `union` is very similar to `struct`:

```c
union Example {
	int i;
	float f;
	char str[20];
} e;
```

The difference is that the memory allocated for union is based on the **largest type** that it can store, instead of the sum of the type sizes.
{:.info}

### Accessing `union` Members
This is very similar to assessing `struct` members:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

union Data {
	int i;
	float f;
	char str[20];
};

int main() {
	union Data data;
	data.i = 66;
	data.f = 99.9;
	strcpy(data.str, "comp281");
	
	/* only data.str will print correctly */
	printf("data.i:\t%d\n", data.i);
	printf("data.f:\t%d\n", data.f);
	printf("data.str:\t%d\n", data.str);
	return 0;
```

The difference is that writing to additional members will **overwrite** previous ones.
{:.info}

## Strings
There is no specific datatype for strings, they are just arrays of `char` terminated by `\0` (`NUL`).

You should be aware of the extra `NUL` character when calculating the length of strings.
{:.warning}

### String Functions
#### `strcat()`
For concatenating two strings:

```c
char *strcat(char *s1, const char *s2);
```

Parameters:

* `s1` - A pointer to a string that will be modified.
* `s2` - A pointer to a string that will be appended to the end of `s1`.

Returns:

* A pointer to `s1` (where the resulting string resides).

#### `strcpy()`
For copying one string into another:

```c
char *strcpy(char *dest, const char *src);
```

Parameters:

* `dest` - The pointer to the destination `char` array where the content is to be copied.
* `src` - The string to be copied.

Returns:

* A pointer to the destination string.

#### `strlen()`
Returns the length of a string:

```c
size_t strlen(const char *s);
```

Parameters:

* `s` - The string whose length is to be found.

Returns:

* The length of the string pointed to by `s`.
	
	This does **not** include the `NUL` character in the length calculation.
	{:.info}

#### `strcmp()`
For comparing two strings:

```c
int strcmp(const char *str1, const char *str2);
```

Parameters:

* `str1` - The first string to be compared.
* `str2` - The second string to be compared.

Returns:

* $0$ - If `s1` and `s2` are the same.
* $<0$ - If `s1` < `s2`.
* $>0$ - If `s1` > `s2`.

#### `strchr()`
For searching for the first occurrence of a character:

```c
char *strchr(const char *str, int c);
```

Parameters:

* `str` - The string to be searched in.
* `c` - The character to be searched for.

Returns:

* A pointer to the first occurrence of the character `c` in the string `str`.
* `NULL` if the character is not found.

## Storage Classes
Each variable has a storage class which decides the **scope**, **default initial value** and **lifetime**. The following storage classes are mostly used:

### Automatic Variables

* Scope - Local to the function block when they are defined.
* Default Initial Value - Garbage.
* Lifetime - Till the end of the function where they are defined.

They can be used in the following two ways:

```c
int detail;
auto int details; 
```

If you have no specific need, use this type of variable.
{:.info}

### External (Global) Variables

* Scope - Not bound by any function; available everywhere.
* Default Initial Value - 0 (Zero)
* Lifetime - Until the program finishes executing.

Global values can be changed by **any** function in the program and are declared outside of the scope of any functions:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int meaningOfLife = 42;

int main() {
	printf("The meaning of life, the universe and everything is: %d.\n", meaningOfLife);
}
```

#### `extern`
If we want to include global variables from **included files** then we need to use the `extern` keyword:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include "file.c"

int main() {
	extern int a;
	printf("%d", a);
	return 0;
}
```

### Static Variables
This tells the compiler to **persist** the variable until the end of the program:

* Scope - Local to the block in which the variable is defined.
* Default Initial Value - 0 (Zero)
* Lifetime - Until the program finished executing.

Instead of creating and destroying a variable every time is goes in and out of scope, a static variable is initialised only once. 

This is **not** the same as a constant.
{:.warning}

The following program:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

void test();

int main() {
	test();
	test();
	test();
	return 0;
}

void test() {
	static int a = 0;
	a++;
	printf("%d\t", a);
}
```

will product the following output:

```
1	2	3
```

### Register Variables
Tells the compiler to store the variable in a CPU register:

* Scope - Local to the function in which it is declared.
* Default Initial Value - Garbage
* Lifetime - Until the end of the function in which the variable is defined.

We can use them like so:

```c
register int number
```

We cannot get the address of register variables.
{:.warning}