---
title: Dynamic Memory Allocation, Stack & Heap
tags: COMP281 Lectures
---
## C Memory Management
So far we have seen:

* **Static-duration Variables** (Allocated in Main Memory)
* **Automatic-duration Variables** (Allocated on the Stack)

There are two issues with these types of variables:

* The size of the allocation must be **compile-time constant**.
* Their **persistence** cannot be manually controlled.

## Dynamic Memory Allocation
Dynamic memory is allocated into the **heap** which grows in the opposite direction to the stack.

### `malloc`

```c
void *malloc(size_t size);
```

* It takes the size of the memory to be allocated,
* and returns the pointer to the memory that has been allocated.

We can type cast this pointer into the type that we want to put in that memory.
{:.info}

We can use `malloc` like so:

```c
int *arr;
arr = (int *)malloc(10 * sizeof(int));
```

We can then use this as an array of integers as this is a pointer to 10 `int`s worth of space.
{:.info}

### `calloc`

```c
void *calloc(size_t nmemb, size_t size);
```

* `nmemb` - The number of things to store.
* `size` - The size of the thing to store.

This function also initialises the memory that is allocated.
{:.info}

* It also returns a pointer to the memory requested.

We can use it like so

Fill me in
{:.error}

### `realloc`
Increases or decreases the size of the specified block of memory, reallocates it if needed:

```c
void *realloc(pointer, int new_size);
```

### Not Enough Memory
If there isn't enough memory available then `malloc` and `calloc` will return `NULL`.

We can handle this like so:

```c
int *arr = (int *)malloc(10 * sizeof(int));
if (arr == NULL) {
	fprintf(stderr, "out of memory!\n");
	exit(1);
}
/* code that uses arr… */
```

### `free`
We can call free on the pointer to memory to return the memory back to the operating system.

It may be useful to set the pointer to `NULL` after the memory has been freed as a reminder.
{:.info}

We can use it like so:

```c
int *j;
j = (int *)malloc(2 * sizeof(int));
free (j);
```

#### Memory Leaks
Failure to deallocate memory using `free` elads to a build-up of **non-reusable** memory.

This wastes memory resources and can lead to allocation failures.

We can use tools such as `valgrind` to debug memory leaks.
{:.info}

## The Stack
Local variables, function arguments and return values are all stored on the stack.

* Each function call generates a new **stack frame**.
* After a function returns, the stack frame disappears, along with ll local variable and function arguments for that invocation.

Each time we call a recursive function, it's variables and space for it's return value is stored on the stack. This will grow until the function unwinds.
{:.warning}