---
title: C Basics and Compiling
tags: COMP281 Lectures
---
**Compiling and running** a program takes the program through the following steps:

1. Editor - You edit the source code on disk `.c`
1. Preprocessor - This program processes the code.
1. Compiler - This creates object code and stores it on disk.
1. Linker - This links object code with libraries and creates `.out`.
1. Loader - This puts the program in memory.
1. Execution - Each instruction in memory is executed in the flow of the program.

There are **four** kinds of files that we work with:

1. **Source Code Files `*.c`**
	* Contain function definitions.
1. **Header Files `*.h`**
	* Contains various preprocessor statements.
	* Allow source code files to access externally-defined functions.
1. **Object Files `*.o` or `*.obj`.**
	* Contain function definitions in binary form.
1. **Binary Executable**
	* They are the output of the linker.
	* Made from a few object files.

## Preprocessor
Preprocessor commands start with `#` and look like so:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
```

### `#include`
This allows us to access function definitions defined **outside of the source file**.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
```

The preprocessor pastes the contents of `<stdio.h>` into the source code at the location of the `#include` statement.

Functions must be declared in the code **before** they are called.
{:.info}

### `#define`
This is used to include **header files** which are used to define **constants**.

For example, if we define the following:

```c
#define MAXNUM 999
```

then the preprocessor will turn the following:

```c
int i = MAXNUM
```

into this:


```c
int i = 999
```

Using `#define` makes your code **more legible** as the values are labelled in the code.
{:.info}

### Other Preprocessor Commands

* `#define`
* `#include`
* `#undef`
* `#ifdef`
* `#ifundef`
* `#error`
* `#if`
* `#else`
* `#elif`
* `#endif`
* `#pragma`

## The Compiler
After the program has been preprocessed it is compiled by the compiler. It turns source code into object code.

Object code is a non-executable binary version of the source code.
{:.info}

The compiler can be invoked as:

```
$ gcc foo.c
```

if we just want to make object files then we can run it like so:

```
$ gcc -c foo.c
```

* -c - Just compile the source files to object files.

Generating object files can be useful in large projects where you don't want to compile everything, or for proprietary code.
{:.info}

You can use the following to name the output of the compiler:

```
$ gcc foo.x -o foo
```

* `-o` - Name the output executable.

## The Linker
This links together object files into a binary executable. It is a separate program called `ld`.

The normal way to link together several files is like so:

```
$ gcc foo.o bar.o baz.o -o myprogram
```

## C Language Basics
This simple example has the following components:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main(void) {
	printf("Hello, World!\n");
	return 0;
}
```

* The `main()` function:
	* `main` is a C keyword that is reserved.
	* The function is called automatically for us. Ideally we should not call it ourselves in the code.
* Statements:
	* Each statement in C needs to be terminated with a semicolon `;`.
	* Functions should return a result, hence we `return 0;`.
* Identifiers
	* These are words used to represent certain program entities such as variables and functions.
	* They have the following rules:
	
	| Rule | Example |
	| :-- | :-- |
| Can contain a mix of characters and numbers | `W3c` |
| Cannot start with a number | `2assignments` |
| Must start with a letter or underscore | `Number1` `_area` |
| Can be of mixed cases | `whoAmI` |
| Cannot contain any arithmetic operators | `Sm*il` |
| Cannot be any other punctuation marks (separators) | `!@#$%^&*(){}` |
| Cannot be a C keyword/reserved word | `main` `printf` |
| Cannot contain a space | `Oh yay` |
| Identifiers are case sensitive | `Happy` ≠ `happy` |

The following keywords are reserved:

| auto | else | long | switch |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | 
| break | enum | register | typedef |
| case | extern | return | union |
| char | float | short | unsigned |
| const | for | signed | void |
| continue | goto | sizeof |volatile |
| default | if | static | while |
| do | int | struct | _Packed |
| double | | | |

### Basic Data Variables and Types
All data in C has to have a specified type. There are the following types:

* Integers:
	* `char`
		* This is ASCII text only.
		* They are only quoted in single quotes `'`.
	* `int`
	* `short`
	* `long`
	* `long long`
* Unsigned Integers:
	* `unsigned char`
	* `unsigned int`
	* `unsigned short`
	* `unsigned long`
	* `unsigned long long`
* Floating Point Numbers
	* `float`
	* `double`
	
#### Constants
These are entities that appear in the program code as fixed values. There are four types on constant:

* Integer:

	```c
	const int FOO = 999;
	```
* Floating Point:

	```c
	const double FOO = 1.23e4;
	```
* Character:

	```c
	const char FOO = 'l';
	```
* Enumeration:

	```c
	enum City {Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds};
	```

Attempts to modify a constant will result in an error.
{:.error}