---
title: COMP109 - Cardinality of Sets
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
The cardinality of a set is the number of elements in the set. The notation for this is {% raw %}<pre>\(\vert A\vert\)</pre>{% endraw %} where {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a set to be counted.

## Power Set and Bit Vectors
We use the correspondence between bit vectors and subsets: {% raw %}<pre>\(\left\vert  \text{\textit{Pow}}(A)\right\vert\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the number of bit vectors of length {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

{% raw %}<pre>\[A\ s.t \left\vert  A \right\vert  = n,\ S_n = \langle\ldots\rangle\]</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\[B \subseteq A \rightarrow X_b = \underbrace{\left[\frac{0}{1},\ldots,\frac{0}{1}\right]}_n\]</pre>{% endraw %}

A bit vector of the set {% raw %}<pre>\(C\)</pre>{% endraw %} is represented by the vector {% raw %}<pre>\(X_C\)</pre>{% endraw %}:

{% raw %}<pre>\[X_c=\left[\ldots\right] \rightarrow C\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This means that provided you know the set you and reconstruct a subset from the bit vector of that subset.

## The Number of {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %}-bit vectors in {% raw %}<pre>\(2^n\)</pre>{% endraw %}
We prove the statement by induction
### Base Case:
{% raw %}<pre>\(n=1\)</pre>{% endraw %}

There are two bit vectors of length 1:

{% raw %}<pre>\(\left[0\right], \left[1\right]\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(2^1=2\)</pre>{% endraw %}

### Inductive Step:
Assume that the property holds for {% raw %}<pre>\(n=m\)</pre>{% endraw %}, so the number of {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %}-bit vectors is {% raw %}<pre>\(2^m\)</pre>{% endraw %}. Now consider the set {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} of all {% raw %}<pre>\((m+1)\)</pre>{% endraw %}-bit vectors. We must show that {% raw %}<pre>\(\left\vert B\right\vert =2^{m+1}\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

We know that all elements of {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} are bit vectors of length {% raw %}<pre>\(m+1\)</pre>{% endraw %}:

{% raw %}<pre>\[\underbrace{\left[\hspace{0.5cm},\right]}_{m+1}\in B\]</pre>{% endraw %}

The first elements apart from the last one are put in a new bit vector:

{% raw %}<pre>\[\underbrace{\left[\ldots\right]}_m\]</pre>{% endraw %}

Given any bit vector there are only two ways of filling in the last value, with a 0 or a 1. As there are two ways of extending a bit vector then you times the bit vector by two.

{% raw %}<pre>\[\left\vert  B \right\vert  = 2 \times 2^m = 2^{m+1}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

## Computing the Cardinality of a Union of Two Sets
If {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} are sets then:

{% raw %}<pre>\[\left\vert  A \cup B \right\vert  = \left\vert  A \right\vert  + \left\vert  B \right\vert  - \left\vert  A\cap B \right\vert \]</pre>{% endraw %}

### Example
Suppose there are 100 third-year students. 40 of them take the module "Sequential Algorithms" and 80 of them take the module "Multi-Agent Systems". 25 of them took both modules. How many students took neither modules?

{% raw %}<pre>\(S=\{s\in \text{Student} \vert  s \text{ takes Seq. Alg.}\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}  
{% raw %}<pre>\(M=\{s\in \text{Student} \vert  s \text{ takes Mult. Agent Systems}\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

* {% raw %}<pre>\(\vert \text{Students}\vert  =100\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\vert S\vert =40\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\vert M\vert  = 80\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\vert S\cap M\vert  =25\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(40+80-25=95=\vert S\cup M\vert \)</pre>{% endraw %}
{% raw %}<pre>\(\vert \sim(S\cup M)\vert =100-95=5\)</pre>{% endraw %}

Therefore, 5 students took neither as they were part of the universal set but not part of the union of the two subsets.

## Computing the Cardinality of a Union of Three Sets
If {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %}, {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(C\)</pre>{% endraw %} are sets then:

{% raw %}<pre>\[\vert A\cup B \cup C\vert = \vert A\vert  +\vert B\vert  + \vert C\vert  - \vert A\cap B\vert -\vert A\cap C\vert  - \vert B\cap C\vert  + \vert A\cap B\cap C\vert \]</pre>{% endraw %}

This and the last union are special cases of the **principle of inclusion and exclusion**.

## Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion
Let {% raw %}<pre>\(A_1,A_2,\ldots,A_n\)</pre>{% endraw %} be sets.

Then:

{% raw %}<pre>\[\left\vert A_1\cup\ldots\cup A_n\right\vert =\sum_{1\leq k\leq n} \left\vert A_i\right\vert -\sum_{1\leq j\leq k\leq n} \left\vert A_j \cap A_k\right\vert +\sum_{1\leq i\leq j\leq k\leq n} \left\vert A_i \cap A_j \cap A_k\right\vert \]</pre>{% endraw %}
{% raw %}<pre>\[-...+(-1)^{n-1}\left\vert A_1\cap\ldots\cap A_n\right\vert \]</pre>{% endraw %}
