---
title: COMP109 - Functions - 6
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Bijections and Cardinality
The cardinality of a finite set is the number of element in the set. Sets {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} have the same cardinality {% raw %}<pre>\(\Rightarrow\)</pre>{% endraw %} there is a bijection from {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} to {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Let {% raw %}<pre>\(S=\{1,2,\ldots,n\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} and let {% raw %}<pre>\(B^n\)</pre>{% endraw %} be the set of bit strings of length {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %}. The function:

{% raw %}<pre>\[f:\text{Pow}(S)\rightarrow B^n\]</pre>{% endraw %}

assigns each subset {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} of {% raw %}<pre>\(S\)</pre>{% endraw %} to its characteristic vector is a bijection.

We used this to compute the cardinality of the powerset.

### Infinite Sets
Sets {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} have the **same cardinality** iff there is a **bijection** from {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} to {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

#### {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{Z}\)</pre>{% endraw %} and even integers.

{% raw %}<pre>\(S=\{n\in\mathbb{Z}\vert n\text{ is even}\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow S\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(f(n)=2n\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a bijection

This is by the definition of bijection as the function maps one to one.

#### Hilberts Infinite Hotel

{% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{N}\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{Z}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

Consider a hotel with rooms and a train with people having the cardinality {% raw %}<pre>\(\in \mathbb{N^+}\)</pre>{% endraw %}. Each person in the train is given a unique room.

A second train arrives with the same properties. Consider that people in train one are given odd rooms and people in train two are given even rooms.

The relation between the cardinality of the hotel and the two trains:

{% raw %}<pre>\(f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{N}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\[f(n) = \begin{cases}2n,& \text{if } n\geq 0\\ -2n-1,& \text{if }n<0\end{cases}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This proves that there is a bijection between the two sets {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{Z}\)</pre>{% endraw %} (the integers) and {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{N}\)</pre>{% endraw %} (natural numbers).

#### Real numbers {% raw %}<pre>\(\{x\in\mathbb{R}\vert o<x<1\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{R^+}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

```charter
x-axis:
	label: x
	range: -10 10
y-axis:
	label: g(x)=1/x-1
	range: -3 3
plot:
	x: range: -10 10 200
	y: math: x^(-1)-1
plot:
	x: 0
	y: -3 3
	color: black
plot:
	x: -11 11
	y: 0 0
	color: black
plot:
	x: 1 1
	y: -3 3
	color: blue
```

This graph shows that there is a one to one mapping of the numbers between 0 and 1 to all real numbers. This is becuse for all values for x between 0 and one all real numbers are produced on the y axis.
