---
title: COMP109 - Logic - 3
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Semantic Consequence
Suppose &#92;(\Gamma&#92;) is a finite set of formulas and &#92;(P&#92;) is a formula. Then &#92;(P&#92;) follows from &#92;(\Gamma&#92;) (is a semantic consequence of &#92;(\Gamma&#92;)) if the following implication holds for every interpretation &#92;(I&#92;):

&#92;[\text{If } I(Q)=1\text{ for all } Q\in \Gamma,\text{then } I(P)=1&#92;]

This is denoted by:

&#92;[\Gamma \models P&#92;]

### Logical Puzzles
An island has two kinds of inhabitants, knights, who always tell the truth, and knaves, who always lie.

You go to the island and meet &#92;(A&#92;) and &#92;(B&#92;).

* &#92;(A&#92;) says, "&#92;(B&#92;) is a knight."
* &#92;(B&#92;) says, "The two of us are opposite types."

What are &#92;(A&#92;) and &#92;(B&#92;)?

We can prove this in a proof by cases or, as the two people have a binary type you can model this question as below.
{:.info}

&#92;(p&#92;): "&#92;(A&#92;) is a knight"; and &#92;(q&#92;): "&#92;(B&#92;) is a knight"

Options for &#92;(A&#92;)

* &#92;(p&#92;) is true &#92;(p\Rightarrow q&#92;)
* &#92;(p&#92;) is false &#92;(\neg p\Rightarrow \neg q&#92;)

Options for &#92;(B&#92;)

* &#92;(q&#92;) is true &#92;(q\Rightarrow \neg p&#92;)
* &#92;(q&#92;) is false &#92;(\neg q\Rightarrow \neg p&#92;)

Here we are summarising the two statements as logical propositions.
{:.info}

#### Truth Table

| &#92;(p&#92;) | &#92;(q&#92;) | &#92;(\neg p&#92;) | &#92;(\neg q&#92;) | &#92;(p\Rightarrow q&#92;) | &#92;(\neg p\Rightarrow \neg q&#92;) | &#92;(q\Rightarrow \neg p&#92;) | &#92;(\neg q\Rightarrow \neg p&#92;) |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 |

&#92;(\wedge&#92;)-ing together all the answers shows that the correct answer is &#92;(p=0,q=0&#92;). This means that &#92;(A&#92;) is a knave and &#92;(B&#92;) is a knave.

Say that the implications in the truth table are numbered, &#92;(&#92;{1,2,3,4&#92;}&#92;). We can then rewrite this table as the following statement:

&#92;[&#92;{1,2,3,4&#92;}\models \neg p \wedge \neg q&#92;]

### Examples
1. Show &#92;(&#92;{(p_1\wedge p_2)&#92;}\models (p_1\vee p_2)&#92;).

    | &#92;(p_1&#92;) | &#92;(p_2&#92;) | &#92;((p_1\wedge p_2)&#92;) | &#92;((p_1\vee p_2)&#92;) |
    | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
    | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
    | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
    | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 |
    | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |

    The top line represents &#92;((p_1\vee p_2)&#92;) which we can see as &#92;(p_1=1, p_2=1&#92;). As the proposition and the result hold true in this case then the statement is correct.
1. Show &#92;(&#92;{p_1&#92;}\not\models p_2&#92;)
    
    | &#92;(p_1&#92;) | &#92;(p_2&#92;) |
    | :-: | :-: |
    | 1 | 1 |
    | 1 | 0 | 
    | 0 | 1 |
    | 0 | 0 |
    
    From this table we can see that the statement is correct as when &#92;(p_1=1, p_2=0&#92;).

### Logic and Proof Principles
#### *Modus Ponens*
Direct proof corresponds to the following semantic consequence:

&#92;[&#92;{P,(P\Rightarrow Q)&#92;}\models Q&#92;]

#### *Reducto ad Absurdum*
Proof by contradiction corresponds to:

&#92;[&#92;{(\neg P\Rightarrow\bot)&#92;}\models P&#92;]

where &#92;(\bot&#92;) is a **special proposition**, which is false under ever interpretation. &#92;(\bot=a\wedge\neg a&#92;).

#### *Modus Tollens*
Another look at proof by contradiction:

&#92;[&#92;{(P\Rightarrow Q),\neg Q&#92;}\models\neg P&#92;]

#### Case Analysis

&#92;[&#92;{(P\Rightarrow Q),(R\Rightarrow Q),(P\vee R)&#92;}\models Q&#92;]

## Proof Theory

We have studies proof as carefully reasoned arguments  to convince a sceptical listener that a given statement is true. These are called **social proofs**.

**Proof theory** is a branch of mathematical logic dealing with proofs as a mathematical objects:

* Strings of symbols.
* Rules for manipulation.
* Mathematics becomes a game played with strings of symbols.
* Can be read and interpreted by computers.

This is to say that in prof theory we make statements that computers are able to solve by putting them in a very structured language. This language can then be solved by Boolean logic.
