---
title: COMP109 - Continuation of Week 1 Summary
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Proving Existential Statements
An existential statement is a statement in the form: 
{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\exists x\ Q(x)\]]]>{% endraw %}
This means that there exists a value to which the function {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(Q(x)\)]]>{% endraw %} holds true. This may be under additional parameters.

The easiest way to prove this is to find an {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} that makes the function {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(Q(x)\)]]>{% endraw %} true. Not all can be proved this way. 

### Examples
1. {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\exists\)]]>{% endraw %} an even integer {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} that can be written in two ways as a sum of two prime numbers. 
	{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[10=5+5=7+3\]]]>{% endraw %}
1. There {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\exists\)]]>{% endraw %} integers {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(m\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} such that {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(m>1\)]]>{% endraw %}, {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n>1\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\frac{1}{m} + \frac{1}{n}\)]]>{% endraw %} is an integer.
	{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[m=n=2\]]]>{% endraw %}
		Giving an example is a suitable proof.

## Proving Universal Statements
Generally proofs will require you to answer a universal statement rather than an existential one. an existential statement is of the form:
{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\forall x \text{ if } P(x) \text{ then } Q(x)\]]]>{% endraw %}
This means that for all of {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} if one function is applied to {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} another function in {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} also holds true. For example:

If {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(a\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(b\)]]>{% endraw %} are integers then {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(6a^2b\)]]>{% endraw %} is even.
{:.info}

In this statement the "{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(a\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(b\)]]>{% endraw %} are integers" count for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(P(x)\)]]>{% endraw %} and "{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(6a^2b\)]]>{% endraw %} is even" counts for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(Q(x)\)]]>{% endraw %}. 

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(6a^2b\)]]>{% endraw %}  

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(2(3a^2b)\)]]>{% endraw %}

By halving you are proving that the answer is even as it is a multiple of two.

### Proof by Exhaustion
For theorems examining a relatively small number of examples you can test each value to see if the statement holds true. That is proof by exhaustion.

#### Example
* Prove that {% raw %}<![CDATA[\((n+1)^3 \geq 3^n\)]]>{% endraw %} if {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} is a positive number.

As this theorem has such a small scope then each value can be tested to see if it is correct.

### Generalising from the Generic Particular
This method allows for using algebra and known rules to prove a statement generally.

#### Method
* Express the statement to be provided in the form {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\forall x,\text{ if } P(x) \text{ then } Q(x)\)]]>{% endraw %}
* Start the proof by supposing {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} is a particular by arbitrarily chosen element for which the hypothesis {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(P(x)\)]]>{% endraw %} is true.
* Show that the conclusion {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(Q(x)\)]]>{% endraw %} is true by using definitions, previously established results, and the rules for logical inference.

```mermaid
graph LR
Definitions --> A[Conjecture]
B[Known Facts] --> A
```

This method brings together definitions and facts into a conjecture.
{:.info}

### Example
Prove that the sum of any two even integers is even.

1. (Assume that/Suppose that) {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(m\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} are particular but arbitrarily chosen even integers.
1. As we assumed that {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(m\)]]>{% endraw %} is an even integer, {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(m = 2k\)]]>{% endraw %} for some integer {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(k\)]]>{% endraw %}. 
1. Likewise {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} is an even integer, {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n = 2l\)]]>{% endraw %}, for some integer {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(l\)]]>{% endraw %}
	* We cannot use the same letter again as {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(k\)]]>{% endraw %} has already been used
1. Then {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(m+n=2k+2l=2(k+l)\)]]>{% endraw %}, which is even as {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(k+l\)]]>{% endraw %} is an integer.

The final step is called the conjecture as is aided by the previous steps to explain why the conjecture holds true.

### Disproving Universal Statement by Counterexample
To disprove a statement means to show that it is false. For example, for a statement such as:
{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\forall x \text{ if } P(x) \text{ then } Q(x)\]]]>{% endraw %}
You are saying that the opposite is true:
{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\exists x \text{ such that } P(x) \text{ and not } Q(x)\]]]>{% endraw %}

This means that you must give at least one example that disproves the universal statement.

#### Example
Is it true that for every positive integer {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n,n^2\geq 2n\)]]>{% endraw %}?

No as for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=1,\ n^2 = 1\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(2n=2\)]]>{% endraw %} which is greater than {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n^2\)]]>{% endraw %}
		
You can correct this by stipulating that for ever integer greater than one the statement holds true.
{:.info}
