---
title: COMP109 - Strong Induction
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
For a normal case of mathematical induction you can prove that a statement holds for all numbers from a particular start point. 

It uses a base case so show that it holds for an individual number and an induction rule that proves that it holds for all numbers following.

* Prove that the property holds for the natural number {% raw %}<pre>\(n=0\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* Prove that if the property holds for {% raw %}<pre>\(n=0,1,\ldots,m\)</pre>{% endraw %} (and not just for m) then it holds for {% raw %}<pre>\(n=m+1\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Can also be used to prove a property for all integers greater than or equal to some particular natural number {% raw %}<pre>\(b\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

## Example 1
Every natural number {% raw %}<pre>\(n \geq 2\)</pre>{% endraw %}, is a prime or product of primes.

### Base Case
Take {% raw %}<pre>\(n=2\)</pre>{% endraw %}

Then {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a prime number.

### Inductive Step
Assume that the property holds for {% raw %}<pre>\(n=m\)</pre>{% endraw %} so every number {% raw %}<pre>\(i\)</pre>{% endraw %} such that {% raw %}<pre>\(2\leq i\leq m\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a prime or a product of primes. 

Now consider {% raw %}<pre>\(n=m+1\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

We proceed by considering cases.

#### Case 1
{% raw %}<pre>\(m+1\)</pre>{% endraw %} is prime.

There is nothing to prove.

#### Case 2
{% raw %}<pre>\(m+1\)</pre>{% endraw %} is not prime.

So {% raw %}<pre>\(m+1=k\times l\)</pre>{% endraw %}, where {% raw %}<pre>\(k\neq1,\ k\neq m+1\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(l\neq 1,\ l\neq\ m+1\)</pre>{% endraw %}

So {% raw %}<pre>\(k\geq2,\ l\geq2,\ k\leq m,\ l \leq m\)</pre>{% endraw %}

So {% raw %}<pre>\(k=P_1\ldots P_n,\ l=Q_1\ldots Q_m\)</pre>{% endraw %}. Then {% raw %}<pre>\(k\times l\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a product of primes.

## Example 2
For any integer {% raw %}<pre>\(n\geq1\)</pre>{% endraw %}, if {% raw %}<pre>\(x_1,x_2,\ldots,x_n\)</pre>{% endraw %} are {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %} numbers, then no matter how the parentheses are inserted into their product, the number of multiplications used to compute the products is {% raw %}<pre>\(n-1\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

As the number are all individual you can't use tricks like using already computed values to speed up the computation.
{:.info}

### Base Case
{% raw %}<pre>\[
X_1 \text{ for } n=1,\ n-1=0
\]</pre>{% endraw %}

### Induction Step
Suppose that no matter how I put parentheses on a sequence of {% raw %}<pre>\(i\)</pre>{% endraw %} elements, where {% raw %}<pre>\(1\leq i\leq m\)</pre>{% endraw %}, I need {% raw %}<pre>\(m-1\)</pre>{% endraw %} multiplications. 

Consider, where {% raw %}<pre>\(1\leq l \leq m\)</pre>{% endraw %}:
{% raw %}<pre>\[
\underbrace{\underbrace{(x_1\times\ldots)}_{l}\times\underbrace{(\ldots\times x_{m+1})}_{m+1-l}}_{m+1}
\]</pre>{% endraw %}

By induction hypothesis
{% raw %}<pre>\[\require{cancel}\cancel{l}-1+m+1-\cancel{l}-\cancel{1}+\cancel{1}=(m+1)-1\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This proves that the property holds for the next value to infinitude. {% raw %}<pre>\(\square\)</pre>{% endraw %}
