---
title: COMP109 - Mathematical Induction
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
* They are used to check conjectures about outcomes of processes that occur repeatedly and according to definite patterns.
* In general, mathematical induction is a method for proving that a property defined for integers &#92;(n&#92;) is true for all values of &#92;(n&#92;) that are greater than or equal to come initial integer.

## Generic Particular v.s. Induction for Universal Statements
### Generalisation from the generic particular:

"Suppose that &#92;(x&#92;) is a particular but arbitrarily chosen..." "...property holds for this &#92;(x&#92;)..." "...then the property holds for all &#92;(x&#92;)"
{:.info}

This argument states that as we have chosen an arbitrary value from a set then the argument will hold for all numbers within the same set.

## Induction
We apply a process to all the values in a set. This process is carried on until an arbitrary value is reached.

* Prove that the property holds for some initial value (e.g. &#92;(n=0&#92;)).
* Prove that if the property hold for &#92;(n=m&#92;) (for any natural number &#92;(m&#92;)) then it holds for &#92;(n=m+1&#92;).

### Example
For a set of dominoes the following process can be applied:

For a domino at position &#92;(i&#92;), when it is pushed the domino at position &#92;(i+1&#92;) will fall sequentially.

The conclusion can be that all of the dominoes will fall.

### Typical Structure
We prove the statement by mathematical induction on &#92;(n&#92;).

#### Base Case
Show that the property hold for some initial value (e.g. &#92;(n=0&#92;)).

#### Inductive Step
Assume that the property holds for &#92;(n=m&#92;). Show that is hold for &#92;(n=m+1&#92;).

#### Conclusion
You can now conclude that the property holds for every natural number &#92;(n&#92;).

### Carl Friedrich Gauss
&#92;[1+\ldots+100=5050&#92;]

If you split the number line in the middle the sum of every column is 101. With 50 columns the answer is 5050.

For every natural number &#92;(n&#92;), 
&#92;[0+1+\ldots+n=\frac{n(n+1)}{2}&#92;]

#### Proof
##### Base Case
&#92;(n=0&#92;) 

&#92;(0 = \frac{0(0+1)}{2} = 0&#92;)

##### Inductive Step
Suppose that for &#92;(n=m&#92;) the property holds.

Then &#92;[0+1+\ldots+m=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}&#92;]

Consider the statement for &#92;(n=m+1&#92;).

&#92;(0+1+2+\ldots+m+(m+1)&#92;).

By induction hypothesis, &#92;(0+1+\ldots+m=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}&#92;)

So, &#92;(0+1+\ldots+m+(m+1)=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}+(m+1)&#92;)

&#92;(=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}+\frac{2(m+1)}{2}=\frac{m(m+1)+2(m+1)}{2}&#92;)

&#92;(=\frac{(m+1)(m+2)}{2}=\frac{(m+1)((m+1)+1)}{2}=\frac{n(n+1)}{2}&#92;)

This shows that for any sequential number the fraction simplifies to the statement, thus proving that it holds for any number.
