---
title: COMP109 - Relations - 5
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Properties of Binary Relations
A binary relation {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(R\)]]>{% endraw %} on a set {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(A\)]]>{% endraw %} is:

### Reflexive 
When {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(xRx\)]]>{% endraw %} for all {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\in A\)]]>{% endraw %}.

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\forall x\ A(x)\Rightarrow xRx\]]]>{% endraw %}

This means that if two of the same elements are compared successfully then the relation is reflexive.

As example of a relation that is non-reflexive is {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(<\)]]>{% endraw %} as the left must be different to the right.

### Symmetric
When {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(xRy\)]]>{% endraw %} implies {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(yRx\)]]>{% endraw %} for all {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x,y\in A\)]]>{% endraw %}:

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\forall x,y\ xRy\Rightarrow yRx\]]]>{% endraw %}

This is similar to Facebook friends. If you are friends with one person they have to be your friend too.

An example that is non-symmetric is {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\leq\)]]>{% endraw %} as they are not necessarily comparable.

### Antisymmetric
When {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(xRy\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(yRx\)]]>{% endraw %} imply {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x=y\)]]>{% endraw %} for all {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x,y\in A\)]]>{% endraw %}:

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\forall x,y\ xRy\text{ and } yRx\Rightarrow y = x\]]]>{% endraw %}

This means that if you can swap the elements and the relation still holds true then the elements must be equal. This is the same as the {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\leq\)]]>{% endraw %} relation.

The {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(L\)]]>{% endraw %} relation from before doesn't satisfy this property as two different words with the same length are not the same.

### Transitive
When {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(xRy\)]]>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(yRz\)]]>{% endraw %} imply {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(xRz\)]]>{% endraw %} for all {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x,y,z\in A\)]]>{% endraw %}:

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[\forall x,y,z\ xRy\text{ and }yRz\Rightarrow xRz\]]]>{% endraw %}

This is the same as the ordering example from before. Thus the relationship {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(<\)]]>{% endraw %} satisfies this property.

## Examples
Which of the following define a relation that is reflexive, symmetric, antisymmetric of transitive?

1. {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} divides {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(y\)]]>{% endraw %} on the set {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\Bbb{Z^+}\)]]>{% endraw %} of positive integers.
	* This relations is reflexive, antisymmetric and transitive.
1. {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\neq y\)]]>{% endraw %} on the set {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\Bbb{Z}\)]]>{% endraw %} of integers.
	* This relations is symmetric and transitive.
1. {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} has the same age as {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(y\)]]>{% endraw %} on the set of people.
	* This relations is reflexive, symmetric and transitive.
