---
title: COMP109 - Functions - 2
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Injective (one-to-one) Functions
Let {% raw %}<pre>\(f:A\rightarrow B\)</pre>{% endraw %} be a function. We call {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %} and injective, or one-to-one, function if:

{% raw %}<pre>\[f(a_1)=f(a_2)\Rightarrow a_1 = a_2 \text{ for all } a_1,a_2\in A\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This is logically equivalent to {% raw %}<pre>\(a_1\neq a_2 \Rightarrow f(a_1) \neq f(a_2)\)</pre>{% endraw %} and so injective functions never repeat values. In other words:

Different inputs give different outputs.
{:.info}

### Example 1
{% raw %}<pre>\(f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow \mathbb{Z}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by {% raw %}<pre>\(f(x)=x^2\)</pre>{% endraw %} is not injective.

{% raw %}<pre>\(h:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow \mathbb{Z}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by {% raw %}<pre>\(h(x)=2x\)</pre>{% endraw %} is injective.

### Example 2
To prove that a function is not injective you can give an individual example of a double mapping.

Take the following question foe the opposite:

{% raw %}<pre>\(h:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow \mathbb{Z}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by {% raw %}<pre>\(h(x)=2x\)</pre>{% endraw %} is injective.

#### Proof
Suppose for a proof by contradiction that there exist {% raw %}<pre>\(a_1,a_2\)</pre>{% endraw %} such that {% raw %}<pre>\(h(a_1=h(a_2)\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(a_1\neq a_2\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

{% raw %}<pre>\(2\times a_1 = 2a_2 \Rightarrow a_1 = a_2\)</pre>{% endraw %}, a contradiction.

## Surjective (or onto) Functions
{% raw %}<pre>\(f:A\rightarrow B\)</pre>{% endraw %} is surjective, or onto, if the range of {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %} coincides with the co-domain {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %}. This means that for every {% raw %}<pre>\(b\in B\)</pre>{% endraw %} there exists an {% raw %}<pre>\(a\in A\)</pre>{% endraw %} with {% raw %}<pre>\(b=f(a)\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

### Examples
{% raw %}<pre>\(h:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow \mathbb{Z}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by {% raw %}<pre>\(h(x)=2x\)</pre>{% endraw %} is not surjective.

This is because you get every even values out as an answer.

{% raw %}<pre>\(h':\mathbb{Q}\rightarrow \mathbb{Q}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by {% raw %}<pre>\(h'(x)=2x\)</pre>{% endraw %} is surjective.

This is as you can use rational numbers to make any other number when doubled.

## Question
Classify {% raw %}<pre>\(f:\{a,b,c\}\rightarrow\{1,2,3\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by:

```mermaid
graph LR
subgraph x
a
b
c
end
subgraph fx
1
2
3
end
a --> 1
b --> 1
c --> 3
2
```

* It is a function.
* Not injective, {% raw %}<pre>\(f(a)=f(b)=1\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* Not subjective as no {% raw %}<pre>\(x\)</pre>{% endraw %} maps with {% raw %}<pre>\(f(x)=2\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

## Bijections
We call {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %} bijective if {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %} is both injective and surjective.

### Examples
{% raw %}<pre>\(f:\mathbb{Q}\rightarrow \mathbb{Q}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by {% raw %}<pre>\(f(x)=2x\)</pre>{% endraw %} is bijective.

## Inverse Functions
If {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a bijection from a set {% raw %}<pre>\(X\)</pre>{% endraw %} to a set {% raw %}<pre>\(Y\)</pre>{% endraw %}, then there is a function {% raw %}<pre>\(f^{-1}\)</pre>{% endraw %} from {% raw %}<pre>\(Y\)</pre>{% endraw %} to {% raw %}<pre>\(X\)</pre>{% endraw %} that undoes the action of {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %}; that is, it sends each element of {% raw %}<pre>\(Y\)</pre>{% endraw %} back to the element of {% raw %}<pre>\(X\)</pre>{% endraw %} that it came from. This function is called the inverse function for {% raw %}<pre>\(f\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Then {% raw %}<pre>\(f(a)=b\)</pre>{% endraw %} if, and only if, {% raw %}<pre>\(f^{-1}(b)=a\)</pre>{% endraw %}

### Example
{% raw %}<pre>\(k:\mathbb{R}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}\)</pre>{% endraw %} given by {% raw %}<pre>\(k(x)=4x+3\)</pre>{% endraw %} is invertible and {% raw %}<pre>\(k^{-1}(y)=\frac{1}{4}(y-3)\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

{% raw %}<pre>\(y=4x+3\)</pre>{% endraw %}. So {% raw %}<pre>\(4x+3=y\)</pre>{% endraw %}, {% raw %}<pre>\(4x=y-3\)</pre>{% endraw %}, {% raw %}<pre>\(x = \frac{y-3}{4}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

This proves the statement by giving the same value.
