---
title: COMP109 - Logic - 1
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
This topic is very similar to the subjects covered in COMP111's [propositional logic]({{site.baseurl}}/comp111/lectures/2020-11-12-1). As result I will only be noting down significant differences.
{:.info}

Logic is concerned with the truth a falsity of statements. The question is when does a statement follow from a set of statements.

## Propositional Logic
Propositional logic is logic which only concerns itself with whether something is true or false. Other languages differ themselves as they deal with uncertainties.

A proposition is a statement that can either be true or false. A statement like &#92;(4+5&#92;) is not a proposition as it doesn't give a true or false answer.

### Compound Propositions
More complex propositions are formed using logical connectives (also called Boolean connectives).

The basic connectives are:

1. &#92;(\neg&#92;): Negation (read "not").
1. &#92;(\wedge&#92;): Conjunction (read "and").
1. &#92;(\vee&#92;): Disjunction (read "or").
    * These are the scientific names and they make a difference between the english and mathematical words.
1. &#92;(\Rightarrow&#92;): Implication (read "if...then").
    * In other schools this may be written as &#92;(\rightarrow&#92;) or as &#92;(\subseteq&#92;).
1. &#92;(\Leftrightarrow&#92;): Equivalence (read "if, and only if,").
    * Similar to 4. the notation is not as set as 1,2 and 3. This may be written as &#92;(\leftrightarrow&#92;) or &#92;(\equiv&#92;).
    
Propositional formed using these logical connectives are called compound propositions; otherwise atomic propositions.

* A propositional formula is either an atom ic or compound proposition.
