---
title: COMP109 - Set Operations
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Union
The union of two sets {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the set: 
{% raw %}<pre>\[A\cup B = \{x\vert x\in A\ \text{or} \in B\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This is the same as logical OR ({% raw %}<pre>\(+\)</pre>{% endraw %})

### Example  
Suppose
{% raw %}<pre>\[A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}\]</pre>{% endraw %} 
Then
{% raw %}<pre>\[A\cup B = \{4,7,8,9,10\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

In bit vectors you just perform a logical OR on both of the bit vectors. The result of the OR is the bit vector of the result of the union.

## Intersection
The intersection of two sets {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the set:
{% raw %}<pre>\[A\cap B = \{x\vert x\in A\ \text{and}\ x\in B\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This is the same as logical AND.

### Example
Suppose
{% raw %}<pre>\[A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}\]</pre>{% endraw %} 
Then
{% raw %}<pre>\[A\cap B = \{4\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

In bit vectors the result of the intersection is the same as a logical AND on the bit vectors.

## Relative Complement
The relative complement of a set {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} to a set {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the set:
{% raw %}<pre>\[A-B=\{x\vert x\in A\ \text{and}\ x\notin B\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This is the same as XOR ({% raw %}<pre>\(\oplus\)</pre>{% endraw %})

This is also sometimes called the set difference.
### Example  
Suppose
{% raw %}<pre>\[A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}\]</pre>{% endraw %} 
Then
{% raw %}<pre>\[A - B = \{7,8\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

In bit vectors perform an XOR on both of the bit vectors to get the result.

## Complement
When we are dealing with subsets of some large set {% raw %}<pre>\(U\)</pre>{% endraw %}, then we call {% raw %}<pre>\(U\)</pre>{% endraw %} the universal set fro the problem in question.

The complement of a set {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the set:
{% raw %}<pre>\[\sim A=\{x\vert x\notin A\}=U-A\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This is the same as a binary NOT {% raw %}<pre>\(\neg\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

### Example
Let
{% raw %}<pre>\[S=\langle1,2,3,4,5\rangle,\ A=\{1,3,5\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}
Then
{% raw %}<pre>\[\sim A = \{2,4\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

## The Symmetric Difference
The symmetric difference of two sets {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the set:
{% raw %}<pre>\[A\Delta B=\{x\vert (x\in A\ \text{and}\ x \notin B)\ \text{or}\ (x\notin A\ \text{and}\ x \notin B)\} \]</pre>{% endraw %}

This is the same as the logical operator NAND.

### Example  
Suppose
{% raw %}<pre>\[A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}\]</pre>{% endraw %} 
Then
{% raw %}<pre>\[A - B = \{7,8,9,10\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

In bit vectors perform an NAND on both of the bit vectors to get the result.

### Proving the Identity of {% raw %}<pre>\(A\Delta B=(A\cup B)-(A\cap B)\)</pre>{% endraw %}
#### Proof
Suppose that {% raw %}<pre>\(x\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a particular but arbitrarily chosen element. Consider all cases of this element:

##### Case 1
{% raw %}<pre>\(x\notin A,\ x\notin B\)</pre>{% endraw %}. By definition of {% raw %}<pre>\(\Delta,\ x\notin A\Delta B\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

By definition of {% raw %}<pre>\(\cup,\ x\notin A\cup B\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Hence {% raw %}<pre>\((A\cup B)-(A\cap B)\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

##### Case 2
{% raw %}<pre>\(x\in A,\ x\notin B\)</pre>{% endraw %}. By definition of {% raw %}<pre>\(\Delta,\ x\in A\Delta B\)</pre>{% endraw %}

By definition of {% raw %}<pre>\(\cup,\ x\in A\cup B\)</pre>{% endraw %} as {% raw %}<pre>\(x\in A\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

As {% raw %}<pre>\(x\notin B,\ x\notin A\cap B\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

So {% raw %}<pre>\(x\in(A\cup B)-(A\cap B)\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

##### Case 3
{% raw %}<pre>\(x\notin A,\ x\in B\)</pre>{% endraw %}. This case is symmetric to case 2.

##### Case 4
{% raw %}<pre>\(x\in A,\ x\in B\)</pre>{% endraw %}. By definition of {% raw %}<pre>\(\Delta,\ x\notin A\Delta B\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

As {% raw %}<pre>\(x\in A\)</pre>{% endraw %}, by definition of {% raw %}<pre>\(\cup,\ x\in A\cup B\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

As {% raw %}<pre>\(x\in A,\ x\in B,\ x\in A\cap B\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

So {% raw %}<pre>\(x\notin (A\cup B)-(A\cap B)\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

By the generalisation from the generic particular principle, the identity holds.

(As both sides are equal for all cases the identity must be valid.)
