---
title: COMP109 - (Naive) Set Theory
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Notation for Sets
A set is a collection of objects, called the elements of the set. 

* {% raw %}<pre>\(\{7,5,3\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

We have written down the element of each set and contained them between the braces {% raw %}<pre>\(\{\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Repetitions and orderings don't matter in sets hence {% raw %}<pre>\(\{7,5,3\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the same as {% raw %}<pre>\(\{5,3,3,3,7\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

We write {% raw %}<pre>\(a\in A\)</pre>{% endraw %} to denote that the object {% raw %}<pre>\(a\)</pre>{% endraw %} is an element of the set {% raw %}<pre>\(a\)</pre>{% endraw %}: {% raw %}<pre>\[7\in\{7,5,3\},4\notin\{7,5,3\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

The order of elements does not matter.
{:.info}

Repetitions don't count.
{:.info}

For a large set, especially an infinite set, we cannot write down all the elements. We use a **predicate** {% raw %}<pre>\(P\)</pre>{% endraw %} instead.
{% raw %}<pre>\[A=\{x\in S\vert P(x)\]</pre>{% endraw %}
denotes the set of objects {% raw %}<pre>\(x\)</pre>{% endraw %} from {% raw %}<pre>\(S\)</pre>{% endraw %} fro which the predicate {% raw %}<pre>\(P(x)\)</pre>{% endraw %} is true.

### Example
Let:
{% raw %}<pre>\[A = \{1,3,5,7,\ldots\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}
Then:
{% raw %}<pre>\[A=\{x\in \mathbb{Z} \vert x \text{ is odd}\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

## More Examples
Find simpler descriptions of the following sets by listing their elements. (The set {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} is written properly however {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(C\)</pre>{% endraw %} are written informally.

1. {% raw %}<pre>\(A=\{x\in\mathbb{z}\vert x^2+4x=12\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

	{% raw %}<pre>\(\{2,-6\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}
1. {% raw %}<pre>\(B=\{n^2\vert n \text{ is an integer}\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

	{% raw %}<pre>\(\{0,1,4,9,16,25,\ldots\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}
	
	{% raw %}<pre>\(B=\{m\in\mathbb{Z}\vert m=n^2 \text{ for some integer } n\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}
	
1. {% raw %}<pre>\(C=\{x\vert x \text{ a day of the week not containing "u"}\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}
	
	{% raw %}<pre>\(\{\text{Monday, Wednesday, Friday}\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}
	
## Important Sets
The empty set had no elements. It is written as {% raw %}<pre>\(\emptyset\)</pre>{% endraw %} or as {% raw %}<pre>\(\{\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

Here are some other sets:

* {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{N}=\{0,1,2,3,\ldots\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} The natural numbers.
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{Z}=\{\ldots,-2,-1,0,1,2,\ldots\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} The integers.
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{Z^+}=\{1,2,3,\ldots\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} The positive integers.
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{Q}=\{\frac{x}{y}\vert x \in\mathbb{Z},y\in\mathbb{Z},y\neq0\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} The rationals.
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\mathbb{R}\)</pre>{% endraw %} Real numbers.
	* {% raw %}<pre>\([a,b]=\{x\in\mathbb{R}\vert a\leq x \leq b\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} The set of real numbers between {% raw %}<pre>\(a\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(b\)</pre>{% endraw %} inclusive.
	
## Computer Representation of Sets
Only finite sets can represented.

* Number of elements not fixed.
	* Lists
* All elements of {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} are drawn from some ordered sequence {% raw %}<pre>\(S=\langle s_1,\ldots,s_n\rangle\)</pre>{% endraw %}. The characteristic vector of {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the sequence {% raw %}<pre>\([b_1,\ldots,b_n]\)</pre>{% endraw %} where:
{% raw %}<pre>\[
    b_i=
    \begin{cases}
      1 & \text{if}\ S_i\in A \\
      0 & \text{if}\ S_i\notin A
    \end{cases}
\]</pre>{% endraw %}
* Sequences of zeros and ones of length {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %} are called bit strings of length {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %}. These are also known as bit vectors or bit arrays.

### Examples
Let {% raw %}<pre>\(S\langle 1,2,3,4,5\rangle, A = \{1,3,5\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(B=\{3,4\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

* Characteristic vectors show how sets relate to sequences. The {% raw %}<pre>\(1\)</pre>{% endraw %} shows that the value is in the set.
	* The characteristic vector of {% raw %}<pre>\(A\)</pre>{% endraw %} is {% raw %}<pre>\([1,0,1,0,1]\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 
	* The characteristic vector of {% raw %}<pre>\(B\)</pre>{% endraw %} is {% raw %}<pre>\([0,0,1,1,0]\)</pre>{% endraw %}.
	
* You would answer a question in the opposite direction like so:
	* The set characterised by {% raw %}<pre>\([1,1,1,0,1]\)</pre>{% endraw %} is {% raw %}<pre>\(\{1,2,3,5\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}.
	* The set characterised by {% raw %}<pre>\([1,1,1,1,1]\)</pre>{% endraw %} is {% raw %}<pre>\(\{1,2,3,4,5\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}.
	* The set characterised by {% raw %}<pre>\([0,0,0,0,0]\)</pre>{% endraw %} is {% raw %}<pre>\(\emptyset\)</pre>{% endraw %}.
