---
title: COMP109 - Week 2 Summary Continued
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Two Classic Results
These are classical proofs as they we're proven by the Ancient Greeks. They are both proofs by contradiction.

### Use proof by contradiction to show that there is no greatest prime number.
* 2, as the smallest prime number, is known as {% raw %}<pre>\(P_1\)</pre>{% endraw %}. All following prime numbers are numbered sequentially.
* For each prime number that is identified any multiples are removed from the endless list of integers.
	* This is continued for {% raw %}<pre>\(P_2=3\)</pre>{% endraw %} where all multiples of 3 are removed.
	
How do we know that at some point in the list all numbers are eliminated?
{:.warning}

#### Proof
Assume for a proof by contradiction that there is a greatest prime number {% raw %}<pre>\(P_n\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Then {% raw %}<pre>\(P_1, P_2, \ldots , P_n\)</pre>{% endraw %} are all prime numbers.

Consider {% raw %}<pre>\(P=P_1\times P_2\times \ldots \times P_{n+1}\)</pre>{% endraw %}

Consider cases:

##### Case 1
{% raw %}<pre>\(P=P_1\times P_2\times \ldots \times P_{n+1}\)</pre>{% endraw %} is prime. As {% raw %}<pre>\(P>P_n\)</pre>{% endraw %} we derive a contradiction.

##### Case 2
{% raw %}<pre>\(P\)</pre>{% endraw %} is not a prime. Then {% raw %}<pre>\(P\)</pre>{% endraw %} has a divisor (all numbers can be expressed as a product of primes).

Then {% raw %}<pre>\(P\)</pre>{% endraw %} has a prime factor.

So one of {% raw %}<pre>\(P_1, P_2, \ldots , P_n\)</pre>{% endraw %} must divide {% raw %}<pre>\(P\)</pre>{% endraw %}. This number can be called {% raw %}<pre>\(P_i\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

{% raw %}<pre>\(P=P_i\times Q,\ Q\neq 1\)</pre>{% endraw %} 

{% raw %}<pre>\(P_1\times\ldots P_{n+1}=P_i\times Q\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(P_1\times\ldots P_{i-1} \times P_i \times P_{i+1} \times\ldots P_{n+1}=P_i\times Q\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(P_i \times Q - P_i (P_1 \times\ldots\times P_{i-1} \times P_{i+1} \times P_n)=1\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(P_i(Q-P_1 \times\ldots\times P_{i-1} \times P_{i+1} \times\ldots\times P_n) = 1\)</pre>{% endraw %}

This is a contradiction as one is not a product of two distinct integers.

As a result the statement that there is no greatest prime number.

### Prove that {% raw %}<pre>\(\sqrt{2}\)</pre>{% endraw %} is not a Rational Number
Assume for a proof by contradiction that {% raw %}<pre>\(\sqrt{2}\)</pre>{% endraw %} is rational.

Then there exist integers {% raw %}<pre>\(m,n\)</pre>{% endraw %} such that {% raw %}<pre>\(\sqrt{2}=\frac{m}{n}, n\neq 0, \frac{m}{n}\)</pre>{% endraw %} is not reducible.

Then {% raw %}<pre>\((\sqrt{2})^2=(\frac{m}{n})^2\)</pre>{% endraw %}. Then {% raw %}<pre>\(2=\frac{m^2}{n^2}\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Then {% raw %}<pre>\(2n^2=m^2\)</pre>{% endraw %}. So {% raw %}<pre>\(m^2\)</pre>{% endraw %} is even.

We already know that {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %} must be even. 

By definition of even {% raw %}<pre>\(m=2k\)</pre>{% endraw %} for some integer {% raw %}<pre>\(k\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

{% raw %}<pre>\(2n^2=m^2, m=2k\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(2m^2=(2k)^2\)</pre>{% endraw %}. Then {% raw %}<pre>\(2n^2=4k^2\)</pre>{% endraw %}. Then {% raw %}<pre>\(n^2=2k^2\)</pre>{% endraw %}, so {% raw %}<pre>\(n^2\)</pre>{% endraw %} is even. 

Then {% raw %}<pre>\(n\)</pre>{% endraw %} is even.

So we derive a contradiction as n and m have a common factor of {% raw %}<pre>\(2\)</pre>{% endraw %}. As it is reducible it doesn't follow the rule.

## Indirect Proof of Existential Statements
Prove that there exist irrational numbers {% raw %}<pre>\(q\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(r\)</pre>{% endraw %} such that {% raw %}<pre>\(q^r\)</pre>{% endraw %} is rational.

Consider Cases:

### Case 1
If {% raw %}<pre>\(\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a rational number then we are done and {% raw %}<pre>\(q=\sqrt2, r=\sqrt2\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

### Case 2
{% raw %}<pre>\(\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}\)</pre>{% endraw %} is not rational. Then:

{% raw %}<pre>\(q=\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}, r=\sqrt2\)</pre>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<pre>\(q^r = (\sqrt2^{\sqrt2})^{\sqrt2}=\sqrt2^{\sqrt2\sqrt2}=\sqrt2^2=2\)</pre>{% endraw %} 
