---
title: COMP109 - Counting - 2
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Sums and Products of a Sequence
Given a sequence of numbers:

$$a_1,a_2,\ldots,a_m,\ldots,a_n$$

we can use the notation:

* $\sum^n_{i=m}a_i$ to represent $a_m+\ldots+a_n$.
* $\prod^n_{i=m}a_i$ to represent $a_m\times\ldots\times a_n$.

Following from this you could combine indexes to make multiple iteration:

$$\sum^5_{i=1}\sum^5_{j=i}(i+5)$$

Here you would apply the sum using $j$ for each sum using $i$. The lower bound for the inner sum would increase every time to match the incrementing $i$.

### Special Case $m=n$
$$\sum^n_{i=m}=a_m$$

Here you would just state the element at that index in the list. 

### Sums and Products Over Sets of Indices
Let $f:D\rightarrow\Bbb R$ be a function with some domain $D$. Then for $S\subseteq D$:

* $\sum_{i\in S}f(i)$ denotes the sum of $f(i)$ over all $i\in S$.

* $\prod_{i\in S}f(i)$ denotes the product of $f(i)$ over all $i\in S$.

#### Example
Suppose that the domain $D=\{a,b,c,d\}$. Additionally there is a function $f:D\rightarrow\Bbb R$

$$
\begin{aligned}
f(a)&=0&f(b)&=1\\
f(c)&=0.3&f(d)&=-1
\end{aligned}
$$

To find the sum of all the elements in $D$ with the function applied to them would be:

$$\sum_{i\in D}f(i)=0+1+.3-1=.3$$

The same applies to products.
{:.info}

### The Factorial Function
The product $\prod^n_{i=1}i$ comes up so often that is has a name. it is called $n$ factorial and is written as $n!$.

As $i=1$ then $0!=1$.

## Permutations
A permutation of a set is just an ordering of its elements.

By the product rule the number of permutations of an $n$-element set is $n!$.

* This is because there are $n$ choices for the first element, then $n-1$ choices for the 2nd element, then $n-2$ choices for the 3rd element and so on.
* Therefore the number of permutations of a list of 3 elements would be $3!=6$

### $k$-Permutations
A selection of $k$ distinct elements of a set, where order matters is called a $k$-permutation of the set.

The number $k$-permutations of an $n$-element set is:

$$
\begin{aligned}
P(n,k)&=n\times(n-1)\times\ldots\times(n-(k-1))\\
&=\frac{n!}{(n-k)!}
\end{aligned}
$$

From the example last lecture, the number of combinations of three elements from a set of five elements where order matters is $P(5,3)=\) \(5\times4\times3$.

#### Notable Example
I have a jar with 3 different sweet. Three children come in, and each take one. How many different outcomes are there?

$$P(3,3)=3\times2\times1=\frac{3!}{0!}=6$$

This is an example of why $0!$ is 1.
{:.info}

Additionally, if the factorial is too large to calculate, you can cancel out values in the numerator and denominator to get a more manageable number.

### Counting $k$-Combinations
A size-$k$ subset is called a $k$-combination.

The number of $k$-combinations of a set of size $n$ is:

$$C(n,k)=\frac{n!}{(n-k)!k!}$$

#### Proof 

1. The number of $k$-permutations of the set is $P(n,k)=\frac{n!}{(n-k)!}$.
1. A $k$-permutation is an ordering of $k$ distinct elements of the set.
1. Each size-$k$ subset has $k!$ orderings, so it corresponds to $P(k,k)=k!$ of the $k$ permutations.
1. By the division rule, $C(n,k)=\frac{P(n,k)}{P(k,k)}=\frac{n!}{(n-k)!k!}$.

This is to say that by dividing out the repeat values we are left with just distinct values.
{:.info}