---
title: COMP109 - Mathematical Induction
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
* They are used to check conjectures about outcomes of processes that occur repeatedly and according to definite patterns.
* In general, mathematical induction is a method for proving that a property defined for integers {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} is true for all values of {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} that are greater than or equal to come initial integer.

## Generic Particular v.s. Induction for Universal Statements
### Generalisation from the generic particular:

"Suppose that {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %} is a particular but arbitrarily chosen..." "...property holds for this {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %}..." "...then the property holds for all {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(x\)]]>{% endraw %}"
{:.info}

This argument states that as we have chosen an arbitrary value from a set then the argument will hold for all numbers within the same set.

## Induction
We apply a process to all the values in a set. This process is carried on until an arbitrary value is reached.

* Prove that the property holds for some initial value (e.g. {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=0\)]]>{% endraw %}).
* Prove that if the property hold for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=m\)]]>{% endraw %} (for any natural number {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(m\)]]>{% endraw %}) then it holds for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=m+1\)]]>{% endraw %}.

### Example
For a set of dominoes the following process can be applied:

For a domino at position {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(i\)]]>{% endraw %}, when it is pushed the domino at position {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(i+1\)]]>{% endraw %} will fall sequentially.

The conclusion can be that all of the dominoes will fall.

### Typical Structure
We prove the statement by mathematical induction on {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %}.

#### Base Case
Show that the property hold for some initial value (e.g. {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=0\)]]>{% endraw %}).

#### Inductive Step
Assume that the property holds for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=m\)]]>{% endraw %}. Show that is hold for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=m+1\)]]>{% endraw %}.

#### Conclusion
You can now conclude that the property holds for every natural number {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %}.

### Carl Friedrich Gauss
{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[1+\ldots+100=5050\]]]>{% endraw %}

If you split the number line in the middle the sum of every column is 101. With 50 columns the answer is 5050.

For every natural number {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %}, 
{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[0+1+\ldots+n=\frac{n(n+1)}{2}\]]]>{% endraw %}

#### Proof
##### Base Case
{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=0\)]]>{% endraw %} 

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(0 = \frac{0(0+1)}{2} = 0\)]]>{% endraw %}

##### Inductive Step
Suppose that for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=m\)]]>{% endraw %} the property holds.

Then {% raw %}<![CDATA[\[0+1+\ldots+m=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}\]]]>{% endraw %}

Consider the statement for {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n=m+1\)]]>{% endraw %}.

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(0+1+2+\ldots+m+(m+1)\)]]>{% endraw %}.

By induction hypothesis, {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(0+1+\ldots+m=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}\)]]>{% endraw %}

So, {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(0+1+\ldots+m+(m+1)=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}+(m+1)\)]]>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(=\frac{m(m+1)}{2}+\frac{2(m+1)}{2}=\frac{m(m+1)+2(m+1)}{2}\)]]>{% endraw %}

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\(=\frac{(m+1)(m+2)}{2}=\frac{(m+1)((m+1)+1)}{2}=\frac{n(n+1)}{2}\)]]>{% endraw %}

This shows that for any sequential number the fraction simplifies to the statement, thus proving that it holds for any number.
