---
title: COMP109 - Logic - 3
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Semantic Consequence
Suppose $\Gamma$ is a finite set of formulas and $P$ is a formula. Then $P$ follows from $\Gamma$ (is a semantic consequence of $\Gamma$) if the following implication holds for every interpretation $I$:

$$\text{If } I(Q)=1\text{ for all } Q\in \Gamma,\text{then } I(P)=1$$

This is denoted by:

$$\Gamma \models P$$

### Logical Puzzles
An island has two kinds of inhabitants, knights, who always tell the truth, and knaves, who always lie.

You go to the island and meet $A$ and $B$.

* $A$ says, "$B$ is a knight."
* $B$ says, "The two of us are opposite types."

What are $A$ and $B$?

We can prove this in a proof by cases or, as the two people have a binary type you can model this question as below.
{:.info}

$p$: "$A$ is a knight"; and $q$: "$B$ is a knight"

Options for $A$

* $p$ is true $p\Rightarrow q$
* $p$ is false $\neg p\Rightarrow \neg q$

Options for $B$

* $q$ is true $q\Rightarrow \neg p$
* $q$ is false $\neg q\Rightarrow \neg p$

Here we are summarising the two statements as logical propositions.
{:.info}

#### Truth Table

| $p$ | $q$ | $\neg p$ | $\neg q$ | $p\Rightarrow q$ | $\neg p\Rightarrow \neg q$ | $q\Rightarrow \neg p$ | $\neg q\Rightarrow \neg p$ |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 |

$\wedge$-ing together all the answers shows that the correct answer is $p=0,q=0$. This means that $A$ is a knave and $B$ is a knave.

Say that the implications in the truth table are numbered, $\\{1,2,3,4\\}$. We can then rewrite this table as the following statement:

$$\{1,2,3,4\}\models \neg p \wedge \neg q$$

### Examples
1. Show $\\{(p_1\wedge p_2)\\}\models (p_1\vee p_2)$.

    | $p_1$ | $p_2$ | $(p_1\wedge p_2)$ | $(p_1\vee p_2)$ |
    | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
    | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
    | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
    | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 |
    | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |

    The top line represents $(p_1\vee p_2)$ which we can see as $p_1=1, p_2=1$. As the proposition and the result hold true in this case then the statement is correct.
1. Show $\\{p_1\\}\not\models p_2$
    
    | $p_1$ | $p_2$ |
    | :-: | :-: |
    | 1 | 1 |
    | 1 | 0 | 
    | 0 | 1 |
    | 0 | 0 |
    
    From this table we can see that the statement is correct as when $p_1=1, p_2=0$.

### Logic and Proof Principles
#### *Modus Ponens*
Direct proof corresponds to the following semantic consequence:

$$\{P,(P\Rightarrow Q)\}\models Q$$

#### *Reducto ad Absurdum*
Proof by contradiction corresponds to:

$$\{(\neg P\Rightarrow\bot)\}\models P$$

where $\bot$ is a **special proposition**, which is false under ever interpretation. $\bot=a\wedge\neg a$.

#### *Modus Tollens*
Another look at proof by contradiction:

$$\{(P\Rightarrow Q),\neg Q\}\models\neg P$$

#### Case Analysis

$$\{(P\Rightarrow Q),(R\Rightarrow Q),(P\vee R)\}\models Q$$

## Proof Theory

We have studies proof as carefully reasoned arguments  to convince a sceptical listener that a given statement is true. These are called **social proofs**.

**Proof theory** is a branch of mathematical logic dealing with proofs as a mathematical objects:

* Strings of symbols.
* Rules for manipulation.
* Mathematics becomes a game played with strings of symbols.
* Can be read and interpreted by computers.

This is to say that in prof theory we make statements that computers are able to solve by putting them in a very structured language. This language can then be solved by Boolean logic.
