---
title: COMP109
tags: COMP109
---
# Cardinality of Sets
The cardinality of a set is the number of elements in the set. The notation for this is $|A|$ where $A$ is a set to be counted.

## Power Set and Bit Vectors
We use the correspondence between bit vectors and subsets: $\left| \text{\textit{Pow}}(A)\right|$ is the number of bit vectors of length $n$.

$$A\ s.t \left| A \right| = n,\ S_n = \langle\ldots\rangle$$

$$B \subseteq A \rightarrow X_b = \underbrace{\left[\frac{0}{1},\ldots,\frac{0}{1}\right]}_n$$

A bit vector of the set $C$ is represented by the vector $X_C$:

$$X_c=\left[\ldots\right] \rightarrow C$$

This means that provided you know the set you and reconstruct a subset from the bit vector of that subset.

## The Number of $n$-bit vectors in $2^n$
We prove the statement by induction
### Base Case:
$n=1$

There are two bit vectors of length 1:

$\left[0\right], \left[1\right]$

$2^1=2$

### Inductive Step:
Assume that the property holds for $n=m$, so the number of $m$-bit vectors is $2^m$. Now consider the set $B$ of all $(m+1)$-bit vectors. We must show that $\left|B\right|=2^{m+1}$.

We know that all elements of $B$ are bit vectors of length $m+1$:

$$\underbrace{\left[\hspace{0.5cm},\right]}_{m+1}\in B$$

The first elements apart from the last one are put in a new bit vector:

$$\underbrace{\left[\ldots\right]}_m$$

Given any bit vector there are only two ways of filling in the last value, with a 0 or a 1. As there are two ways of extending a bit vector then you times the bit vector by two.

$$\left| B \right| = 2 \times 2^m = 2^{m+1}$$

## Computing the Cardinality of a Union of Two Sets
If $A$ and $B$ are sets then:

$$\left| A \cup B \right| = \left| A \right| + \left| B \right| - \left| A\cap B \right|$$

### Example
Suppose there are 100 third-year students. 40 of them take the module "Sequential Algorithms" and 80 of them take the module "Multi-Agent Systems". 25 of them took both modules. How many students took neither modules?

$S=\{s\in \text{Student} | s \text{ takes Seq. Alg.}\}$  
$M=\{s\in \text{Student} | s \text{ takes Mult. Agent Systems}\}$

* $|\text{Students}| =100$
* $|S|=40$
* $|M| = 80$
* $|S\cap M| =25$

$40+80-25=95=|S\cup M|$  
$|\sim(S\cup M)|=100-95=5$

Therefore, 5 students took neither as they were part of the universal set but not part of the union of the two subsets.

## Computing the Cardinality of a Union of Three Sets
If $A$, $B$ and $C$ are sets then:

$$|A\cup B \cup C|= |A| +|B| + |C| - |A\cap B|-|A\cap C| - |B\cap C| + |A\cap B\cap C|$$

This and the last union are special cases of the **principle of inclusion and exclusion**.

## Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion
Let $A_1,A_2,\ldots,A_n$ be sets.

Then:

$$\left|A_1\cup\ldots\cup A_n\right|=\sum_{1\leq k\leq n} \left|A_i\right|-\sum_{1\leq j\leq k\leq n} \left|A_j \cap A_k\right|+\sum_{1\leq i\leq j\leq k\leq n} \left|A_i \cap A_j \cap A_k\right|$$
$$-...+(-1)^{n-1}\left|A_1\cap\ldots\cap A_n\right|$$
