---
title: Fragmentation, Replication & Transparency
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
This lecture covers **transparency**:

* Things that the DDBMS keeps **hidden** from people accessing the database.
	* **Fragmentation** and **replication** are examples of the things that are **handled transparently**.

## Fragmentation
This is where the database is split into different **fragments** that can then be stored at **different** nodes.

### Horizontal Fragmentation (Sharding)

| Fragment 1 |
| :-- |
| Fragment 2 |
| Fragment 3 |
| Fragment 4 |

The fragments **may** overlap.
{:.info}

* Each **tuple** could be stored at a different site.
* The way to get the original table back is to complete the `UNION` of the fragmented tables.

### Vertical Fragmentation

| 1<br><br><br><br><br><br><br> | 2<br><br><br><br><br><br><br> | 3<br><br><br><br><br><br><br> | 4<br><br><br><br><br><br><br> |
| :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| | | |

The fragments **typically** overlap.
{:.info}

* Certain **attributes** are stored at different sites.
* You can get the original table back by completing the **natural join** of the distributed tables.

Users don't see the fragments, just the full relations.
{:.info}

## Replication
Different sites can store copies of data that belongs to other sites:

* Consider that a central office holds all the data from the branches.
	* This improves **resilience**.
* Consider that a branch holds data about suppliers from the central office.
	* This improves **efficiency**.

### Full Replication
This means that each fragment is stored at every site:

* There are no longer any fragments.
* Faster query answering.
* Very slow updates.

### No Replication
This is where each fragment is stored at a **unique** site:

* Crashes are a big problem.

### Partial Replication
This is where a combination of the above are used:

* Limit the number of copies of each fragment.
* Replicate only the fragments that are useful.

## Transparency
DDBMSs ensure that users do not need to know certain facts when creating queries. Transparency can be implemented at different **levels**.

* **Fragmentation Transparency**
	* Fragmentation is transparent to users.
	* Users pose queries against the entire database.
	* The distributed DBMS translates this into a query plan that fetchers the required information from appropriate nodes.

* **Replication Transparency**
	* Ability to store copies of data items and fragments at different sites.
	* Replication is transparent to the user.
	
* **Location Transparency**
	* The location where data is stored is transparent to the user.
* **Naming Transparency**
	* A given name (of a relation) has the same meaning everywhere in the system.
	
There are also many more types of transparency.
{:.info}