---
title: Avoiding Cascading Rollbacks
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
Cascading rollbacks have the issues of breaking durability and they are also slow. As a result we want to avoid them.

**Recoverable** schedules still cascade.
{:.info}

## Cascadeless Schedules
A schedule is **cascadeless** if each transaction in it reads only values that were written by transaction that have already committed.

No dirty reads = no cascading rollbacks.
{:.info}

Additionally, for **recoverable schedules**, the log records have to reach the disk in the right order.

Cascadeless schedules are **recoverable** but **not serialisable**.
{:.warning}

## Strict Schedules
A schedules is **strict** if each transaction in it reads **and writes** only values that were written by transaction that have already committed.

For example:

$$
S_1:w_2(X);c_2;w_1(X);r_1(X);c_1;
$$

### Strict Two-Phase Locking (2PL)
This is the most popular variant of 2PL as it enforces:

* Conflict-serialisability.
* Strict Schedules

The following constraints must be followed:

* A transaction $T$ must not release **any lock that allows $T$ to write data** until:
	* $T$ has committed or aborted, **and**
	* The commit/abort log record has been written to disk.

This means that:

* With **simple** locking **no locks** can be released until the conditions are met.
* With **shared/exclusive** locks **just exclusive locks** can't be released.

For examples of strict 2PL with simple and shared/exclusive locks see [the lecture](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/no-cascading-rollbacks?module_item_id=1218337).
{:.info}

#### Strict 2PL & Deadlocks
With this method there is still a risk of deadlocks we can fix this by:

* Detecting deadlocks & fixing them.
* Enforcing deadlock-free schedules.
	This is an issue as deadlock-free schedules aren't (strict) 2PL.
	{:.warning}

## Schedule Categorisation
Schedules can be categorised in the following hierarchy:

* Serial
	* 2PL Strict Schedules
		* Cascadeless Schedules
			
			You can have a cascadeless schedule that is not strict.
			{:.info}
			* Recoverable Schedules
			
				All cascadeless schedules are recoverable.
				{:.info}
		* Conflict Serialisable Schedules
			
			These may or may not be cascadeless (including children).
			{:.info}
			* Serialisable Schedules