---
title: COMP207 - Timestamp Based Schedules
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
This methods detects and fixes deadlocks in strict 2PL systems.

This implements the idea that each transaction should be executed instantly when it is started.

This makes it equivalent to a serial schedule that has a transactions in the order of their start time.
{:.info}

## Timestamps
Each transaction $T$ is assigned a unique integer $\text{TS}(T)$ when it **starts**. This is the timestamp of $T$.

If $T_1$ arrived earlier than $T_1$, we require $\text{TS}(T_1)<\text{TS}(T_2)$.

This is different to last time as we assign a new timestamp even **after a restart**.

Additionally, for each database item $X$, we need to maintain:

* **Read Time of $X$** - $\text{RT}(X)$
	
	The timestamp of the youngest transaction that read $X$.
	{:.info}
* **Write Time of $X$** - $\text{WT}(X)$
	
	The timestamp of the youngest transaction that wrote $X$.
	{:.info}

| Action | Timestamp | Read Time | Write Time |
| :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| | | $\text{RT}(X)=0$ | $\text{WT}(X)=0$ |
| $r_2(X)$ | $\text{TS}(T_2)=2$ | $\text{RT}(X)=2$ | $\text{WT}(X)=0$ |
| $r_1(X)$ | $\text{TS}(T_1)=1$ | $\text{RT}(X)=2$ | $\text{WT}(X)=0$ |
| $r_3(X)$ | $\text{TS}(T_3)=3$ | $\text{RT}(X)=3$ | $\text{WT}(X)=0$ |
| $w_2(X)$ |  | $\text{RT}(X)=3$ | $\text{WT}(X)=2$ |
| $w_4(X)$ | $\text{TS}(T_4)=4$ | $\text{RT}(X)=3$ | $\text{WT}(X)=4$ |

### Read Requests
If $T_1$ requests to read $X$:

* Abort and restart $T_1$ if $\text{WT}(X)>\text{TS}(T_1)$.
* Else, grant request.

### Write Requests
If $T_1$ requests to write $X$:

* Abort and restart $T_1$ if $\text{RT}(X)>\text{TS}(T_1)$ *or* $\text{WT}(X)>\text{TS}(T_1)$.
* Else, grant request.

A full example of a timestamp based schedules is given in [the lecture](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/timestamp-based-schedules?module_item_id=1218339).
{:.info}

## Properties of Timestamp Based Scheduling
Good properties:

* Enforces conflict-serialisable schedules.
* Deadlocks don't occur.

Bad properties:

* Cascading rollbacks.
* Starvation can occur.
	* Through cyclic aborts and restarts of transactions.
	
	This can be prevented using methods not covered.
	{:.info}

## Ensuring Strictness
Schedules enforced by timestamp based schedulers are not strict.
{:.warning}

An additional condition can be added to enforce a strict schedule:

> Delay read or write requests until the youngest transaction who wrote $X$ before has committed or aborted.

## Multiversion Concurrency Control (MVCC)
This is a variant of timestamp scheduling used by many DBMSs. It is the same idea as timestamp based approaches by you have multiple versions of the database:

* This means that write operations **do not overwrite** each other, but instead $w_i(X)$ **creates a new version** of $X$ with it's own timestamp $\text{TS}(T_i)$.
* Whenever you read, you read the latest version before your timestamp.

This means that a transaction only needs to restart if it tries to write **and** the read timestamp is later than your timestamp.

The rules are:

* **For Writes** - Abort and restart $T_1$ if $\text{RT}(X)>\text{TS}(T_1)$ and otherwise, grant request.
* **For Reads** - Always granted.

There is also a strict variant, where you delay reads until the transaction you read from commits.
{:.info}

There is a full example with MVCC in [the lecture](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/timestamp-based-schedules?module_item_id=1218339).
{:.info}