---
title: Checkpoints
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
By making checkpoints we can enable faster recovery and make the log files use less space.

## Simple Checkpointing
This method is applicable for **undo logging**.

The idea is that we checkpoint the log periodically:

* Every $m$ minutes or after $t$ transaction since the last checkpoint.
* No need to undo transactions before the checkpoint.

The part before the checkpoint can be discarded from the log.
{:.info}

### Procedure

1. Stop accepting new transactions
1. Wait until all active transactions finish and have written `COMMIT` or `ABORT` record to the log.
1. Flush the log to disk.
1. Write a log record `<CHECKPOINT>`.
1. Flush the log to disk again.
1. Resume accepting transactions.

### Recovery with Simple Checkpoints
To complete recovery just step back through the undo log up to the checkpoint just as before.

## ARIES Checkpoints
This style of checkpoints has the following two requirements:

* Undo/redo logging is used.
* Transactions do not write to buffers before they are sure they want to commit. 

### Procedure

1. Write `<CHECKPOINT(T1, T2,…)>` in log and flush it.
	* `T1, T2,…` are the transaction in progress (i.e. not committed and not aborted).
1. Write the content of the buffer to disk (i.e. output).
1. Write `<END CHECKPOINT>` in log and flush it.

### Recovery with ARIES Checkpoints
This is the same as recovering with an undo/redo log except:

* Only redo part of committed transactions in `T1,T2,…` after `<CHECKPOINT(T1,T2,…)>`.
* Then undo all of uncommitted transactions in `T1,T2,…` including before `<CHECKPOINT(T1,T2,…)>`.

You must stop after having found a `<CHECKPOINT(T1,T2,…)>` with corresponding `<END CHECKPOINT>` **and** `<START Ti>` for all mentioned transactions that are **uncommitted**.