---
title: COMP207 - Market Basket Model
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
This is a basic technique for data-mining.

## Market-Basket Data
Data can be described by:

* A set of items $I$.
* A set of baskets $B$:
	* Each basket $b\in B$ is a subset of $I$.
	
For example:

| Purchase ID | Items Bought |
| :-- | :-- |
| 101 | milk, bread, cookies, juice |
| 792 | milk, juice |
| 1130 | milk, bread, eggs |
| 1735 | bread, cookies, coffee |

In this table:

* $I=$ all unique items that were bought.
	* {bread, coffee, eggs, juice, milk}
* $B=$ the set of baskets represented by each purchase ID.
	* {$b_1,b_2,b_3,b_4$}
	
## Frequent-Itemset Mining
Consider for the previous table we are asked:

> Which items occur frequently together in a basket?

Given a set of items $I$ and a set of baskets $B$:

* The **support** of a subset $J$ of $I=$ frequency with which the items in $J$ occur together in a basket in $B$.

Therefore to calculate the support of a set of items $J$ we can use:

$$
\frac{\text{number of baskets in }B\text{ containing all items in }J}{\text{number of baskets in }B}
$$

The support of {milk, juice} $=\frac 2 4=0.5$ as the set is contained in two out of the four baskets.
{:.info}

There are additional examples of calculating **support** at [the end of the lecture](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/basics-of-market-basket-model?module_item_id=1218373).
{:.info}

### Frequent Itemsets
A subset $J$ of $I$ is **frequent** if its support is at least $s$:

* $s$ - **Support threshold** specified by the user.

There are examples of classifying **frequent itemsets** and **frequent pairs** at [the end of the lecture](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/basics-of-market-basket-model?module_item_id=1218373).
{:.info}

## Complex Tables
Sometimes we have tables with additional columns which make the baskets hard to define:

| Purchase ID | Customer ID | Items Bought |
| :-- | :-- | :-- |
| 101 | A | milk, bread, cookies, juice |
| 792 | B | milk, juice |
| 1130 | A | milk, bread, eggs |
| 1735 | C | bread, cookies, coffee |

### Customer Baskets
We could define the baskets as **per customer**:

* This would mean one basket per `Customer ID`.
	* Only add distinct items to the basket of the customer.
	
We can also do this **with respect to** any of the other basket columns, such as `Purchase ID`.
{:.info}
	
This would generate the following table:

| Customer ID | Items Bought |
| :-- | :-- |
| A | milk, bread, cookies, juice, eggs |
| B | milk, juice |
| C | bread, cookies, coffee |


We then define all other notion using this new table and the following language:

> The support of a set $J$ with **respect to the customers**.

This is the support of $J$ computed using the new set of baskets.
{:.info}

> $J$ is frequent with **respect to the customers**.

If its support with respect to the customers is at least the support threshold.
{:.info}

There is an additional example on [slide 8 of the lecture](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/more-about-the-market-basket-model?module_item_id=1218374) with generic item names.
{:.info}

## Association Rules
This is a variant of **frequent-item** mining queries.

They take the form:

$$
\{i_1,i_2,\ldots,i_n\}\Rightarrow j
$$

For example:

* Customers who buy nappies frequently also buy beer:
	
	$$
	\{\text{nappies}\}\Rightarrow \text{beer}
	$$
	
### Properties of Association Rules
The **support** of ($i_1,i_2,\ldots,i_n,j$) must be high otherwise the association won't have any meaning.

We can calculate **confidence** like so:

$$
\frac{\text{support of }\{i_1,i_2,\ldots,i_n,j\}}{\text{support of }\{i_1,i_2,\ldots,i_n\}}
$$

This is the percentage of people who bought all of the items vs those who just bought the indicator items.
{:.info}

* This should also be high.
* Should differ significantly from fraction of baskets containing $j$.

We could phrase this association like:

> 67% of all customers who bought milk also bought juice.

There are examples of calculating **confidence** starting at [slide 11 of the lecture](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/more-about-the-market-basket-model?module_item_id=1218374).
{:.info}

### Finding Association Rules

1. Focus on assocation rules with high support:
	* At lease the support threshold $s$.
1. Compute the set $F$ of all itemsets $J$ with support $\geq s$.
1. From $F$ it is easy to obtain the association rules:
	* For each set $J$ in $F$ and each $j$ in $J$, consider the rule $\\{j\\}\Rightarrow j$.
	* Compute the confidence for $\\{j\\}\Rightarrow j$ and compare with the percent of baskets containing $j$

### A-Priori Algorithm
The goal is compute all the itemset $J$ with support $\geq s$. The idea is that:

$$
\text{If }J\text{ has support }\geq s\text{, then all subsets of }J\text{ have support }\geq s\text{.}
$$

Using this we compute frequent itemsets from smaller ones:

* $F_1:=$ itemsets $\\{i\\}$ with support $\geq s$.
* $F_2:=$ itemsets $\\{i,j\\}$ with $\\{i\\},\\{j\\}\in F_1$ and support $\geq s$.
* $F_3:=$ itemsets $\\{i,j,k\\}$ with $\\{i,j\\},\\{i,k\\},\\{j,k\\}\in F_1$ and support $\geq s$.
* ...

#### A-Priori Algorithm Formal Method

* Input:
	* The set of items $I$.
	* The set of baskets $B$.
	* Max size $q$.
	* Support threshold $s$.

* Output - Subsets $J$ of $I$ with $\lvert J\rvert\leq q$ and support $\geq s$.

{% raw %}
```
C1 := {{i} : i∈I}
for k = 1 to q do
	Fk := {J ∈ Ck : J has support ≥ s}
	if k = q then stop
	Ck+1 := {J ⊆ I : |j| = k + 1 and all subsets of J of size k occur in Fk}
```
{% endraw %}