---
title: COMP207 - Serialisable
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
## Types of Schedules
So far we have seen two extremes of scheduling:

Serial Schedules

* Execute correctly.
* Maintain consistency of the database.
* Inefficient in multi-user environments (because transactions have to wait until others are finished).

Concurrent Schedules

* May not execute correctly.
* May not guarantee consistency of the database or isolation.
* Efficient in multi-user environments (if you get asked to do something, just do it!).

## Concurrent Schedules
Concurrent schedules can be **faster** then serial ones by they are **not** always **equivalent**.

In a serial schedule you have to wait until one transaction is over until you can start another. 
{:.info}

However by running two transactions simultaneously you may get erroneous results do to the interactions between the two transactions.

Concurrent schedules **do not** guarantee **consistency** or **isolation**.
{:.error}

## Serialisable Schedules

> A schedule $S$ is serialisable if there is a serial schedule $S'$ that has the same effect on $S$ on every initial database state:

| Schedule $S$ | |
| :-- | :-- |
| `read(X)` | |
| `X := X + N` | |
| | `read(X)` |
| | `X := X + M` |
| |  `write(X)` |
| | `commit` |
| `read(Y)` | |
| `Y := Y + N` | |
| `write(Y)` | |
| `commit` | |

| Equivalent Serial Schedule $S'$ | |
| :-- | :-- |
| `read(X)` | |
| `X := X + N` | |
| `read(Y)` | |
| `Y := Y + N` | |
| `write(Y)` | |
| `commit` | |
| | `read(X)` |
| | `X := X + M` |
| |  `write(X)` |
| | `commit` |

Serialisable schedules guarantee:

* Correctness and consistency because they inherit the properties of serial schedules.
* **Doesn't** satisfy isolation, as they can read uncommitted data.
	
	This can be fixed.
	{:.info}

The problem is that they are difficult to test:

* Don't depend on reads, writes, and commits, but also on the non-database operations.
* Non-database operations can be complex.