---
title: Document Type Definitions (DTD)
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
There are two ways to define the format of XML files. This lecture explains how to use DTD.

DTDs contain information about the structure of an XML document:

* Elements that may occur in the document.
* Sub-elements that an element may have.
* Attributes that an element may have

## Structure
The are included at the beginning of the XML document between:

```xml
<?xml ... standalone="no">
```

and the **root element**.

They are included between the following tags:

```xml
<!DOCTYPE lecturers [
...
]>
```

where `lecturers` is the name of the **root tag**.

## Elements
The elements of a DTD has the following syntax:

```xml
<!--There must be 1 or more lecturer below the root element-->
<!ELEMENT lecturers (lecturer+)>
<!--Name is required, phone and email are optional, zero or more occurrences of teaches-->
<!ELEMENT lecturer (name, phone?, email?, teaches*)>
<!ELEMENT teaches (code, title)>
<!--Includes special symbol for text data-->
<!ELEMENT name (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT phone (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT email (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT code (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT title (#PCDATA)>
```

To parse this we identify the rules for element that can occur in the XML document (inside `()`:

* Names with no qualifying punctuation must occur exactly once.
* Options for repetitions are:
	* `*` - Zero or more.
	* `+` - One or more.
	* `?` - Either zero or one.

## Defining Attributes
To define the following attribute:

```xml
<module code=”COMP105” title=“Programming Paradigms” />
```

We would first define the module (without the elements):

```xml
<!ELEMENT module EMPTY>
```

Then define the attributes like follows:

```xml
<!ATTLIST module code CDATA #IMPLIED>
<!ATTLIST module title CDATA #IMPLIED>
```

The value after the `#` can be some of the following:

* `#IMPLIED` - Optional
* `#REQUIRED` - Required
* Some value `COMPXXX` defining a default string.
* `#FIXED` and some value - Constant

### Attribute Datatypes
You can use the following datatypes:

* `CDATA` - Character data, containing any text.
* `ID` - Used to identify individual elements in a document.
	* `ID` is an element name.
* `IDREF`/`IDREFS` - Must correspond to the value of `ID` attributes for some element in the document.
	* You can't define what type you are pointing to, only that it is some ID for some object.
* You can also have a list of names in the following form:
	
	```xml
	(en1|en2|...)
	```

### Element Identity, `ID`s & `IDREF`s

* `ID` allows a unique key to be associated with an element. 
* `IDREF` allows an element to refer to another element with the designated key and attribute type.
* `IDREFS` allows an element to refer to multiple elements.

To loosely mode the relationships:

* `Department` has `Lecturers`
* `Department` has a `head` who is a `Lecturer`

we would write:

```xml
<!ATTLIST lecturer staffNo ID #REQUIRED>
<!ATTLIST department staff IDREFS #IMPLIED>
<!ATTLIST department head IDREF #IMPLIED>
```

## Document Validity
There are two levels of document processing:

* **Well-Formed**
	* All elements must be within one root element.
	* Elements must be nested in a tree structure without any overlap.
	
	This ensures that the XML document conforms to the structural and notational rules of XML.
	{:.info}
* **Valid**
	* Document is well-formed.
	* Document conforms it it's DTD or XML schema