---
title: COMP207 - Key-Value Stores
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
This is the simplest type of database with only two columns, one for the key and one for the value.

They have a simple access mechanism:

* `find(k)` - Returns the **local** value for key $k$.
* `write(k, v)` - Inserts value $v$ under key $k$.

## Distributed Storage
Each key-value pair $(k,v)$ is stored at some node:

1. Assign values $v$ for $k$ to integers between 0 and $2^n-1$ where $n$ is large enough to hold all nodes and duplicates:
	* This uses a hash function:
		
		$$
		h:\text{keys}\rightarrow\{0,\ldots,2^n-1\}
		$$
1. Distribute node to some of the integers (typically randomly). This creates a ring of nodes.
1. If $(k,v)$ is assigned to integer $i$, it is stored at the node following $i$ on the ring.

### Scalability via Horizontal Fragmentation
New nodes can be added to the ring easily:

* Add nodes to free range(s) and more key-value pairs appropriately.
* Automatic **horizontal fragmentation**.

### Replication
Replication is used to ensure availability.

Replicas (copies of the key-value pairs) are stored on consecutive nodes on the ring in clockwise order.

### Eventual Consistency
DynomoDB and Voldemort allow **multiple versions** of a data item to be present at the same time (**versioning**):

* If a newer version of a data item is not yet available at a node, the older version is used.
	* This is fine for many applications, like a shopping cart.
	
If this isn't good enough we can assign a **vector clock** to each version of an item $X$:

1. A list (vector) of pairs `(node, timestamp)`:
	* `node` - The node that has written $X$.
	* `timestamp` - The local time on the node the iem $X$ was written.
1. Use the clock to decide if version $V_1$ originated from version $V_2$:
	* $V_1$ originated from $V_2$ if, for all nodes in $V_2$s clock, the corresponding timestamp is $\leq \text{timestamp in }V_1$.
		
		Check that all the numbers in the vector clock are bigger, or equal to, the previous clock.
		{:.info}
	* If it is incomparable (multiple values change), return all possibilities.
	
		This is if some numbers are bigger and smaller between versions.
		{:.info}
	
		Incomparability between versions are resolved at read-time.
		{:.info}

### Property Implementation

* Scalability:
	* Adding new nodes to increase capacity is easy.
	* Automatic horizontal fragmentation.
* Availability & Fault-Tolerance:
	* Due to replication.
	* Can retrieve value for a key, even if a few nodes storing values for that key fail.
* High Performance:
	* Retrieving the value for a key is fast:
		* Apply the hash function to determine the node, then ask the node.
	* The same is true for writing.