---
title: COMP207 - Deletion & Properties of B+ Trees
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
## Deleting Values
To delete a value/pointer pair:

1. Find the leaf that should contain the value.
	* If not there then we are done.
1. Remove the value/pointer pair.
1. Let the current node $C$.
1. Let $x$ be:
		
	$$
	x=
	\begin{cases}
	2 & \text{if } C\text{ is root}\\
	\lceil\frac{n+1}2\rceil & \text{if } C \text{ id internal node}\\
	\lfloor\frac{n+1} 2\rfloor & \text{if } C \text{ is leaf}
	\end{cases}
	$$
	
	* If $C$ has above $x$ pointers - Fix ancestors (if necessary) and you are done.
	* if $C$ is the root but not a leaf - Remove it (and let the child of the root be the new root).
	* Otherwise, check if an adjacent node has at least $x+1$ pointers.
		
		A node is **adjacent** to another if they are at the same depth and their common ancestor has no descendant at that depth between them.
		{:.info}
		* If so - Take one, fix ancestors (if necessary) and you are done.
		* Otherwise - Merge with sibling and go to line 3 with the parent as the current node.

The running time is:

$$
O(h\times\log_2n)
$$

where $h$ is the height of the B+ tree. 

The **real** running time is:

$$
O(h\times D)
$$

where $D$ is the time for a disk operation.

## Properties of B+ Tree Indexes

* Fast lookups, insertions and deletions:

	$$
	\begin{aligned}
	O(h\times\log_2n) & = O(\log_nN\times\log_2n)\\
	& = O(\log_2N)
	\end{aligned}
	$$
	
	where $n\approx B$ and $h$ is the height of the tree.
* They remain balanced when modified.
* Huge capacity, even with height 3 if blocks are large enough:
	* Block Size - 16K
	* Values Stores in Index - 4 bytes
	* Pointers - 8 bytes
	* Largest $n$ so that each B+ tree node fits into a block is 1364.
	* B+ trees with height 3 can store $>n^3=2.5\times 10^9$ values.
* Can be implemented efficiently with respect to number of disk accesses:
	* Number of disk accesses is typically $\approx 2+h$, where $h$ is the height of the B+ tree.
* Most of the B+ tree can be kept in memory:
	* Specifically the upper levels.