---
title: MapReduce
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
Often problems involving **large datasets** can be **divided** into many **small problems** that can be solved in **parallel** and then have their results combined.

**MapReduce** is a programming framework that allows us to implement two methods:

* **Map** - The computation on the smaller chunks of data.
* **Reduce** - How the results are combined to the final result.

MapReduce is **not** a **universal** parallelism framework, not every problem that is parallelisable can be expresses and solved nicely with MapReduce.
{:.warning}

## Counting Words in a Document
Given a collection of text files, for each word $w$, count how many times $w$ occurs in the files.

To do this we input the data like so:

```
("file1.txt","<file contents>"),("file2.txt","<file contents>"),("file3.txt","<file contents>"),...
```

These are grouped into `(key,value)` pairs.
{:.info}

The MapReduce computation will then return:

```
(<word1>,<count>),(<word2>,<count>),(<word3>,<count>),...
```

### The Map Function
The map function is applied to a single key/value pair and produces a list of zero or more key/value pairs:

```
Map(String filepath, String contents):
	for each word w in contents:
		output pair (w, "1")
```

The Reduce function will handle adding together all of the key/value pairs so we don't have to do that at this stage.

### Grouping
After the Map function have been applied, we group all values by key:

```
("hello",1),("world",1)("hello",1),("hello",1)
```

this would then go to:

```
("hello", (1, 1, 1),("world",1)
```

### Copy & Merge
This completes the grouping again for each text file.

### The Reduce Function
The Reduce function takes a key and a list of values as input and outputs a list of key/value pairs:

```
Reduce(String word, Iterator<String>values):
	int count = 0
	for each v in values:
		count = count + parseInt(v)
	output pair (word,toString(count))
```

This only applies to a single key/value pair, not the whole list. This enables more parallel computing.

## Additional Examples
There are addition examples on the following in [this lecture video](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46572/pages/more-indepth-details-of-mapreduce-not-required-for-the-exam?module_item_id=1218355):

* Matrix Multiplication (page rank)
* Relational Algebra:
	* Selection $\sigma_c(R)$
	* Natural Join $R\bowtie S$
	
## Distributed File System
MapReduce operates on it's own distributed file system:

* All the data is distributed over the nodes.
* Replication is used for fault-tolerance.

It appears to the user as if it was a regular file system.
{:.info}

Input files can be very large. To deal with this, MapReduce splits these into **chunks** (16-64 MB) and provides an **ID** for each chunk in a key/value pair.

## Implementation
**Map** returns a list of key/value pairs:

```
Map(String key, String value)
```

**Reduce** returns a list of key/value pairs:

```
Reduce(String key, Iterator<String> values)
```

In practice that is also some additional code to set:

* Locations of input and output files.
* Tuning Parameters:
	* Number of Machines
	* Memory per Map