---
title: COMP207 - Schedules
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
## Translating SQL into Low-Level Operations
In our example table with the following schema:

```
Emplyees(e_id, first_name, last_name, birth_day, salary)
```

From this we could run the following two statements:

```sql
SELECT salary
FROM Employees
WHERE e_id = 1234;
```

```sql
UPDATE Employees
SET salary = salary * 1.1
WHERE e_id = 1234;
```

These statement could be made into the following three transaction operations:

1. `read(e_id = 1234, salary)`
1. `salary = salary * 1.1`
1. `write(e_id = 1234, salary)`

There are two database operations (`read()` and `write()`) and a calculation.

### Basic Operations
There are two basic operations of database transactions:

* `read(X)` - Reads a database item `X` into a program variable, also called `X`:
	1. Find the address of the disk block that contains item `X`.
	1. Copy that disk block into a buffer in main memory.
		* Provided that disk block isn't already in some main memory buffer.
	1. Copy item `X` from the buffer to the program variable `X`.
	
* `write(X)` - Writes the value of program variable `X` into the database item named `X`:
	1. Find the address of the disk block that contains item `X`.
	1. Copy that disk block into a buffer in main memory.
		* If that disk block is not already in some main memory buffer.
		* Copy item `X` from the program variable `X` into its correct location in the buffer.
		* Store the updated block from the buffer back to disk either immediately or at some later point in time.

## Schedules
**Schedules** hold many transactions for execution. The operations making up the transaction are then executed by the schedule in the date order:

* It must preserve that the operation in each transaction happen in the right order.

There are two types:

* **Serial Schedules** - Executes the transactions one after another.
* **Concurrent Schedules** - Can interleave operations from the transactions in the schedule.

### Serial Schedule Example
Consider the following two transactions:

```
Begin(T1)
	read(X);
	X := X + 100;
	write(X);
	read(Y);
	Y := Y + 50
	write(Y);
	commit;
End(T1)
```

```
Begin(T2)
	read(X);
	read(Y);
	X := X + Y;
	write(X);
	commit;
End(T2)
```

#### Shorthand
We could write this as the following shorthand:

$$
S_a:r_1(X);w_1(X);r_1(Y);w_1(Y);c_1; r_2(X); r_2(Y); w_2(X); c_2;
$$

The following symbols are used:

* $S_{\text{id}}$ = Schedule (`id` is the schedule ID)
* $r_i(X)$ = `read(X)` in transaction `i`
* $w_i(X)$ = `write(X)` in transaction `i`
* $c_i$ = `commit` in transaction `i`
* $a_i$ = abort (`rollback`) in transaction `i`

### Concurrent Schedule Example
The following transactions:

```
Begin(T1)
	read(X);
	X := X + 100;
	write(X);
	read(Y);
	Y := Y + 50
	write(Y);
	commit;
End(T1)
```

```
Begin(T2)
	read(X);
	read(Y);
	X := X + Y;
	write(X);
	commit;
End(T2)
```

can be represented in many ways in a concurrent schedule:

$$
S_b: r_1(X); w_1(X); r_2(X); r_1(Y); w_1(y); c_1; r_2(Y); w_2(X); c_2;
$$

In addition all **serial** schedules are **types of concurrent** schedules.
{:.info}

The order of operations must still reflect that of the order of the underlying transactions.
{:.info}