---
title: Recoverable Schedules
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
This lecture aims to fix the [Concurrency & Partial Execution Example]({{site.baseurl}}/comp207#concurrency--partial-execution-example). We said that there a no good solutions to recover from this problem.
{:.info}

## Dirty Reads
This is where the isolation property is not enforced in order to gain efficiency:

* Spend less time preventing dirty reads.
* Gain more parallelism by executing more transactions that would otherwise have to wait.

You can set this in the DBMS:

```sql
SET TRANSACTION READ WRITE
	ISOLATION LEVEL READ UNCOMMITTED;`
```

You can also set the first value to `READ ONLY`.

You can also set the second value to:

* `READ COMMITTED`
* `REPEATABLE READ`
* `SERIALIZABLE`

## Cascading Rollback
If a transaction $T$ aborts then we need to:

* Find all transaction that have read items written by $T$.
	
	This is very slow and we wan to avoid this.
	{:.info}
* Recursively abort all transaction that have read items written by an aborted transaction.
	
	If we **do not** abort these then we break **isolation**. If we **do** abort them then we can break **durability**.
	{:.info}

### Recoverable Schedules
The problem for **durability** in regards to cascading rollbacks is that if a transaction $T_2$ reads data from some transaction $T_1$, then $T_2$ commits and afterwards $T_1$ aborts. 

We can still do cascading rollback, but only active transaction can be forced to abort.
{:.info}

A schedule is **recoverable** if the following is true:

* A transaction $T_1$ commits and has read an item $X$ that was written before by a different transaction $T_2$.
* Then $T_2$ must commit before $T_1$ commits.

There is also the following additional requirement:

* All log records have to reach disk in the order in which they are written.

	This avoids the issue where the commit statements can be swapped.
	{:.info}

#### Example
This is an example of a recoverable schedule:

$$
S_1: w_2(X);w_1(Y);w_1(X);\mathbf{r_2(Y)};w_2(Y);\mathbf{c_1};c_2;
$$

This is however not serialisable.