---
title: Physical Query Plans
tags: COMP207 Lectures
---
A **physical query plan** adds information required to execute the optimised query plan such as:

* Which **algorithm** to use for execution of operators.
* How to **pass information** from one operator to the other.
* Good **order** for computing joins, unions, etc.
* **Additional operations** such as **sorting**.

## Converting a Logical Plan to a Physical Plan
We can generate many different physical query plans from an optimised logical query plan. We need to choose the physical plan with the **lowest cost estimate** in terms of:

* Time
* Disk Accesses
* Memory
* Communication
* ...

### Estimating Cost of Execution
We should mainly focus on the number of disk accesses as they are usually the most expensive operation.

It can be influenced by:

* Selection of algorithms for the individual operators.
* Method for passing information.
* Size of intermediate results.
	
	This is one of the most critical factors.
	{:.info}

We can estimate these from parameters of the database such as:

* Size of relations.
* Number of distinct items per attribute per relation.
* Computed exactly from the database. 

You can't execute the query, you have to rely on statistics gathered from data.
{:.info}

#### Estimate Size of Selection

Estimate for the size of $\sigma_{A=a}(R)$:

$$
\frac{\lvert R\rvert}{\text{number of distinct values in column }A \text{ of relation }R}
$$

Estimate for the number of block required to store $\sigma_{A=a}(R)$:

$$
\frac{\text{number of blocks for }R}{\text{number of distinct values in column }A\text{ of relation }R}
$$

This is good if values in column $A$ or $R$ occur equally often, but can be bad.
{:.info}

##### Example
Assume that:

* `Stores` contains 80 tuples, stored in 20 blocks.
* There are exactly 4 distinct values for the city attribute of `Stores`.

To estimate the **size** of $\sigma_\text{city=Liv}(\text{Stores})$:

$$
\frac{80}4=20\text{ tuples}
$$

To estimate for the number of blocks that are required to store $\sigma_\text{city=Liv}(\text{Stores})$:

$$
\frac{20}4=5\text{ blocks}
$$

#### Estimate Size of Joins
To estimate $R\bowtie S$ we can do an estimate based on the size of $R$ and $S$ and a number of distinct values in common attributes:

$$
\frac{\lvert R\rvert\times\lvert S\rvert}{\text{max. number of distinct values for }A\text{ in }R\text{ or }S}
$$

This assumes that $A$ is the only common attribute.
{:.warning}

#### Passing Information
There are two methods for passing information between different stages of the query plan:

* **Materialisation** - Write intermediate results to disk.
* **Pipelining** (stream based processing):
	* Passes the tuples of one operation directly to the next operation without using disk.
	* Extra buffer for each pair of adjacent operation to hold tuples passing from one relation to the other.	