---
title: COMP109 - Week 2 Summary Continued
tags: COMP109 Lectures
---
## Two Classic Results
These are classical proofs as they we're proven by the Ancient Greeks. They are both proofs by contradiction.

### Use proof by contradiction to show that there is no greatest prime number.
* 2, as the smallest prime number, is known as $P_1$. All following prime numbers are numbered sequentially.
* For each prime number that is identified any multiples are removed from the endless list of integers.
	* This is continued for $P_2=3$ where all multiples of 3 are removed.
	
---
@figure
How do we know that at some point in the list all numbers are eliminated?
@/
---

#### Proof
Assume for a proof by contradiction that there is a greatest prime number $P_n$.

Then $P_1, P_2, \ldots , P_n$ are all prime numbers.

Consider $P=P_1\times P_2\times \ldots \times P_{n+1}$

Consider cases:

##### Case 1
$P=P_1\times P_2\times \ldots \times P_{n+1}$ is prime. As $P>P_n$ we derive a contradiction.

##### Case 2
$P$ is not a prime. Then $P$ has a divisor (all numbers can be expressed as a product of primes).

Then $P$ has a prime factor.

So one of $P_1, P_2, \ldots , P_n$ must divide $P$. This number can be called $P_i$. 

$P=P_i\times Q,\ Q\neq 1$ 

$P_1\times\ldots P_{n+1}=P_i\times Q$

$P_1\times\ldots P_{i-1} \times P_i \times P_{i+1} \times\ldots P_{n+1}=P_i\times Q$

$P_i \times Q - P_i (P_1 \times\ldots\times P_{i-1} \times P_{i+1} \times P_n)=1$

$P_i(Q-P_1 \times\ldots\times P_{i-1} \times P_{i+1} \times\ldots\times P_n) = 1$

This is a contradiction as one is not a product of two distinct integers.

As a result the statement that there is no greatest prime number.

### Prove that $\sqrt{2}$ is not a Rational Number
Assume for a proof by contradiction that $\sqrt{2}$ is rational.

Then there exist integers $m,n$ such that $\sqrt{2}=\frac{m}{n}, n\neq 0, \frac{m}{n}$ is not reducible.

Then $(\sqrt{2})^2=(\frac{m}{n})^2$. Then $2=\frac{m^2}{n^2}$.

Then $2n^2=m^2$. So $m^2$ is even.

We already know that $m$ must be even. 

By definition of even $m=2k$ for some integer $k$. 

$2n^2=m^2, m=2k$

$2m^2=(2k)^2$. Then $2n^2=4k^2$. Then $n^2=2k^2$, so $n^2$ is even. 

Then $n$ is even.

So we derive a contradiction as n and m have a common factor of $2$. As it is reducible it doesn't follow the rule.

## Indirect Proof of Existential Statements
Prove that there exist irrational numbers $q$ and $r$ such that $q^r$ is rational.

Consider Cases:

### Case 1
If $\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}$ is a rational number then we are done and $q=\sqrt2, r=\sqrt2$.

### Case 2
$\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}$ is not rational. Then:

$q=\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}, r=\sqrt2$

$q^r = (\sqrt2^{\sqrt2})^{\sqrt2}=\sqrt2^{\sqrt2\sqrt2}=\sqrt2^2=2$ 