---
title: Description Logic - Tableaux Method
tags: COMP304 Lectures
---
## Decision Method
It is important to find a decision method for the consistency checking problem.

The tableaux method allows us to solve this problem but **only for acyclic** knowledge bases.

## Using Concepts
An atomic concept $A$ **directly uses** an atomic concept $B$ if there is a subsumption $A\sqsubseteq X$ or $A\equiv X$ in $\mathcal T$ such that $B$ occurs in $X$.

For example if the following is in $\mathcal T$:

$$
\text{granparent}\equiv\text{person}\sqcap\exists\text{hasChild}.\text{parent}
$$

then $\text{grandparent}$ directly uses $\text{person}$ and $\text{parent}$.

An atomic concept $A$ **indirectly uses** an atomic concept $B$ if there is a finite sequence $A_1, \ldots, A_n$ of atomic concepts such that $A$ directly uses $A_1$, $A_1$ directly uses $A_2, \ldots,A_{n-1}$ directly uses $A_n$ and $A_n$ directly uses $B$.

For example if the following are in $\mathcal T$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{mother}&\equiv\text{parent}\sqcap\text{female}\\
\text{parent}&\equiv\text{person}\sqcap\exists\text{hasChild}.\top
\end{aligned}
$$

then $\text{mother}$ does not directly use $\text{person}$, but $\text{mother}$ does use $\text{person}$.

## Cycles

* A knowledge base $\mathcal K$ contains a **terminological cycle** if there is a concept that uses itself.
* A knowledge base $\mathcal K$ is **acyclic** if:
	* $\mathcal K$ contains no terminological cycle
	* Every atomic conept occurs on the left-hand side of at most one subsumption in $\mathcal T$.
	
### Cyclical Example

| TBox |
| :-- |
| $\text{person}\equiv\text{person}\sqcap\exists\text{hasChild}.\top$ |
| $\text{person}\sqsubseteq\exists\text{isChildOf}.\text{parent}$ |

## The Tableaux Method
Let $\mathcal K=(\mathcal A,\mathcal T)$ be an acyclic knowledge base. Consistency of $\mathcal K$ is checked in six steps.

### 1. Eliminate $\sqsubseteq$
Suppose $A\sqsubseteq X$ occurs in $\mathcal T$:

1. Add a new atomic concept $A^*$ that characterises those $X$ that are $A$.

	$A^*$ is the property that distinguishes those $X$ that are $A$ from those $X$ that are $\neg A$.
	{:.info}
1. Replace the concept with $A\equiv X\sqcap A^*$
1. Call the resulting knowledge base $\mathcal K^*$.

### 2. Expand the TBox

1. If $A\equiv X$ is in $\mathcal T^*$, then every occurrence of $A$ in other concept definitions can be replaced by $X$.
	
	Replace simple objects with their definitions.
	{:.info}
1. Keep replacing until no futher replacements are possible.
1. Call the resulting TBox $\mathcal T^{*e}$.

If $\text{

### 3. Eliminate Defined Concepts from the ABox
Suppose $o:A$ is in $\mathcal A$ and $A\equiv X$ is in $\mathcal T^{*e}$:

1. Then we can replace $o:A$ by $o:X$.
	
	We replace objects by their definitions.
	{:.info}
1. Call the resulting ABox $\mathcal A^e$.

	
### 4. Put the ABox in Negation Normal Form
This step removes negations from the ABox.

1. Rewrite formulas in $\mathcal A^e$ in such a way that negations only occur immediatley in front of atomic concepts.
1. Call the resulting ABox $\mathcal A^{en}$.

In order to put formulas in NNF, you can use the following replacement rules:

| Original | Replacement |
| :-- | :-- |
| $\neg\top$ | $\bot$ |
| $\neg\bot$ | $\top$ |
| $\neg\neg X$ | $X$ X
| $\neg(X\sqcap Y)$ | $\neg X\sqcup \neg Y$ |
| $\neg(X \sqcup Y)$ | $\neg X\sqcap \neg Y$ |
| $\neg\forall r.X$ | $\exists r.\neg X$ |
| $\neg\exists r.X$ | $\forall r.\neg X$ |

### 5. Apply Completion Rules to the ABox
This step builds a tree of sets of concept and role assertions:

* The root of the tree is $\mathcal A^{en}$.

Whenever one of the following rules can be applied to any node $\Gamma$, use them to generate new nodes:

| Originals | New Successors |
| :-- | :-- |
| $o:X\sqcap Y\in\Gamma$ and $o:X\notin\Gamma$ | $\Gamma\cup\\{o:X, o:Y\\}$ |
| $o:X\sqcup Y\in\Gamma$ and neither $o:X\in\Gamma$ or $o:Y\in\Gamma$ | $\Gamma\cup\\{o:X\\}$ and $\Gamma\cup\\{o:Y\\}$ |
| $o_1:\exists r.X\in\Gamma$ and there is no $o_2$ where $o_s:X\in\Gamma$ and $(0_1, o_2):r\in\Gamma$ | Take an object $o_3$ that does not occur in $\Gamma$ and create $\Gamma\cup\\{(o_1,o_3):r,o_3:X\\}$ |
| $o_1:\forall.rX\in\Gamma$ and $(o_1,o_2):r\in\Gamma$ but $o_2:X\notin\Gamma$ | $\Gamma\cup\\{o_2:X\\}$ |
| $o:\forall\in\Gamma$, $o:\neg A\in\Gamma$ and $o:\bot\notin\Gamma$ | $\Gamma\cup\\{o:\bot\\}$

### 6. Check the Leaves for Contradictions
A set $\Gamma$ contains an **immediate contradiction** if $o:\bot\in\Gamma$ for some $o$.

If no more rules can be applied, check the leaves (endpoints):

* If all endpoints contain immediate contradictions, $\mathcal K$ is inconsistent.
* If at least one endpoint contains no immediate contradiction, $\mathcal K$ is consistent.