---
title: Description Logic - Consistency, Coherence, Entailment & Reduction
tags: COMP304 Lectures
---
## Consistency
The simplest form of error is inconsistency. A knowledge base $\mathcal K$ is inconsistent if it is impossible to **satisfy**:

* $\mathcal K$ is inconsistent if for every $\mathcal I$ we have $\mathcal I\nvDash\mathcal K$.

In addition to knowledge bases, TBoxes and ABoxes can also be inconsistent by themselves.
{:.info}

## Coherence
A concept is coherent if it is possible, according to the knowledge base, for there to be objects satisfying it:

* A concept $X$ is coherent in $\mathcal K$ if there is some interpretation $\mathcal I$ such that $\mathcal I\vDash\mathcal K$ and $X^\mathcal I\neq\emptyset$.

Incoherent concepts are not necessarily errors:

* Incoherence of an atommic concept is almost always an error.
* Incoherence of non-atomic concepts are a warning sign, by often not an error.

### Coherence Example
For the following TBox:

* $\text{parent}\equiv\text{person}\sqcap\exists\text{hasChild}.\top$
* $\text{grandparent}\equiv\text{person}\sqcap\exists\text{hasChild}.\text{parent}$

The concept $\text{parent}\sqcap\text{grandparent}$ is coherent, while $\neg\text{parent}\sqcap\text{grandparent}$ is not.

## Entailment
An **assertion** $o:X$ is **entailed** by $\mathcal K$ if every interpretation satisfying $\mathcal K$ also satisfies $o:X$. This is written as:

$$
\mathcal K\vDash o:X
$$

A **subsumption** $X\sqsubseteq Y$ is entailed by $\mathcal K$ if every interpretation satisfying $\mathcal K$ also satisfies $X\sqsubseteq Y$ (this is also true for $X\equiv Y$). We write this as:

$$
\mathcal K\vDash X\sqsubseteq Y
$$

Only concept assertions can be entailed, therefore $\mathcal K\vDash (o_1,o_2):r$ is impossible.

### Entailment Example
Let $\mathcal K=(\mathcal A,\mathcal T)$ be given by:

| ABox |
| :-- |
| $\text{Ann}:\text{person}\sqcap\neg\text{grandparent}$|
| $(\text{Ann},\text{Claire}):\text{hasChild}$ |

| TBox |
| :-- |
| $\text{parent}\equiv\text{person}\sqcap\exists\text{hasChild}.\top$ |
| $\text{grandparent}\equiv\text{person}\sqcap\exists\text{hasChild}.\text{parent}$ |

We have:

* $\mathcal K\vDash\text{Claire}:\neg\text{parent}$
* $\mathcal K\vDash\text{grandparent}\sqsubseteq\text{person}$

## Reductions to Consistency
Coherence and entailment are related to consistency:

* Coherence:
	* $X$ is coherent in $\mathcal K$ if and only if $(\mathcal A\cup\\{o:X\\},\mathcal T)$ is consistent, where $o$ does not occur in $\mathcal A$.
* Entailment:
	* $\mathcal K\vDash o:X$ if and only if $(\mathcal A\cup\\{o:\neg X\\},\mathcal T)$ is inconsistent.
	* $\mathcal K\vDash X\subseteq Y$ if and only if $(\mathcal A\cup\\{o:X,o:\neg Y\\},\mathcal T)$ is inconsistent, where $o$ does not occur in $\mathcal A$.

As a result of the reductions, if we can determine whether a knowledge base is consistent, we can also determine coherence and entailment.
{:.info}