---
title: Modal Logic - The Proof System $K$
tags: COMP304 Lectures
---

The proof system $K$ has the following axioms:

* $T$ - All the (substitution instances of) **validities** of propositional logic.
* $K$ - $\square(\phi\implies\psi)\implies(\square\phi\implies\square\psi)$.

and the following two rules:

* MP - If you have derived $\phi$ as well as $\phi\implies\psi$, then derive $\psi$.
* Necc - If you have derived $\phi$, then derive $\square\phi$.

We write: if $\phi$ is derivable in $K$, we write $\vdash_K\phi$.
{:.info}

## Example of a Proof in $K$
We want to show: $\vdash_K\square(p\wedge q)\implies\square p$

| Step | Expression | Justification |
| :-: | :-- | --: |
| 1 | $(p\wedge q)\implies p$ | $T$ |
| 2 | $\square((p\wedge q)\implies p)$ | Necc(1) |
| 3 | $\square((p\wedge q)\implies p)\implies(\square(p\wedge q)\implies\square p)$ | $K$ |
| 4 | $\square(p\wedge q)\implies\square p$ | MP(2, 3) |

Reasoning: Allowed because it is obtained from 2 and 3 using the rule MP.

## Abbreviations & Conveniences
As $\lozenge\phi$ is an abbreviation for $\neg\square\neg\phi$, we can switch between writing $\lozenge$ and $\neg\square\neg$ at will.

We don't need a justification to do this.
{:.info}

Additionally, as proofs in $K$ tend to contain very long formulas, we can substitute line numbers instead of expressions:

| Step | Expression | Justification |
| :-: | :-- | --: |
| 1 | $(p\wedge q)\implies p$ | $T$ |
| 2 | $\square(1)$ | Necc(1) |
| 3 | $(2)\implies(\square(p\wedge q)\implies\square p)$ | $K$ |
| 4 | $\square(p\wedge q)\implies\square p$ | MP(2, 3) |

You should keep this to a **minimum** in order to keep the proof readable.
{:.warning}

## Soundness & Completeness
The system $K$ is well-designed:

* If $\vdash_k\phi$ then $\vDash\phi$
	* So $K$ is **sound**.
* If $\vDash\phi$ then $vdash_K\phi$
	* So $K$ is **complete**.

We don't have to prove any questions like this in the exam.
{:.success}

## Strategies for Finding Proofs in $K$
If your expression can't be proven using an axiom or rule, then the following rules can be helpful:

Suppose you want to show that $\vdash_K\phi$, and that $\phi$ cannot be derived using $T,K$ or Necc. Therefore you **must** prove $\phi$ using MP.

This means we must:

1. Choose a formula $\psi$
1. Derive $\psi$.
1. Derive $\psi\implies\phi$.

It may help to work backwards in a situation like this.
{:.info}

Completing a lot of examples is the best way to gain an understanding of how to derive $\psi$. However, the following can also help:

* $\psi\implies\phi$ is often an instance of $T$.
* $\psi$ tends to have lots of $\square$ and $\implies$, few $\lozenge$ and $\neg\square$.

### Additional Example of a Proof in $K$
Show $\vdash_K\lozenge p\implies\lozenge(p\vee q)$:

| Step | Expression | Justification |
| :-: | :-- | --: |
| $n$ | $\neg\square\neg p\implies\neg\square\neg(p\vee q)$| MP($n-2, n-1$)|
| $n-1$ | $(n-1)\implies(n)$ | $T$ |
| $n-2$ | $\square\neg(p\vee q)\implies\square\neg p$ | MP($n-3, n-4$) |
| $n-3$ | $(n-4)\implies(n-2)$ | $K$ |
| $n-4$ | $\square(\neg(p\vee q)\implies\neg p)$ | Necc($n-5$) |
| $n-5$ | $\neg(p\vee q)\implies\neg p$ | $T$ |

This is proven in reverse and hence the steps are in reverse. We will have to renumber the table for this to be a valid proof.
{:.info}



