---
title: Control Structures, Functions & Libraries
tags: COMP284 Lectures
---

## Conditional Statements
In addition to the standard **curly brace** notation we can also use the following notation:

```php
if (condition):
	statement
endif
```

This must be ended with the statement `endif`.

It also supports conditional expressions:

```php
condition ? if_true_expr : if_false_expr
```

Other conditional statements such as:

* Switch-Case
* If 
* While & Do-While
* Break & Continue

are very similar to other languages.

### Exceptions & Error Handling
PHP has several classes of error:

* Exception
* Error
* Notice
* Warning

We can throw **exceptions** with a `throw` statement:

```php
throw new Exception(message)
```

* `message` is a string.

Other **user-level** errors are generated like so:

```php
trigger_error(message [, type])
```

* `message` is a string.
* `type` is an integer representing the error level.

We can use the same structures from Java to handle errors:

```php
try { statements }
catch { Exception $e } { statements }
finally { statements }
```

We can create a useful error handler like so:

```php
$x = 0;
try {
	$y = 1 % $x ;
} catch ( Throwable $e ) {
	echo " Caught : $e \ n " ;
	$y = 0;
} finally {
	echo " y = $y \ n " ;
}
```

```
Caught : DivisionByZeroError: Modulo by zero in try.php:3
Stack trace:
#0 {main}
y = 0
```

## Functions
Functions are defined with the following syntax:

```php
function identifier($param1, &$param2, ...) {
	statements
}
```

To change a variable outside the function then it must be preceded with an ampersand `&`.
{:.warning}

In addition, **parameters** can have **default values**:

```php
$param = const_expr
```

The `return` value stops execution of the function and returns the associated value:

* Functions can have more than one `return` value.
* The `return` values don't have to have the same type.

### Calling Functions
We can call functions in the normal way:

```php
identifier(arg1, arg2, ...)
```

* We can use a default value by leaving a black space between commas.
* We can call a function before it is defined.

### Type Checking in Functions
As there is no type checking, if we want an input variable to be a particular type, we need to check the type ourselves:

```php
function bubble_sort($array) {
	if (!is_array($array))
		throw new Exception("Argument is not an array.");
	...
}
```

### Functions & HTML
It is possible to include HTML markup in the body of a function:

```php
<?php
	function print_form($fn) {
?>
<form>
	<?php echo $fn?>...
</form>
<?php
}
print_form("test");
?>
```

A call of the function will execute the PHP, insert the output into the HTML markup and print the markup.

### Functions with a Variable Number of Aguments
We can write functions that can take an arbitrary number of arguments:

```php
function sum() {
	if (func_num_args() < 1)
		return 0;
	$sum = 0;
	foreach (func_get_args() as $value)
		$sum += $value;
	return $sum;
}
```

We can use the following functions:

| Function | Description |
| :-- | :-- |
| `func_num_args()` | Returns the number of arguments passed to a function. |
| `func_get_arg(arg_num)` | Returns the specified argument or `False` on error. |
| `func_get_args()` | Returns an array with copies of the arguments passed to a function. |

## Scope
PHP distinguishes the following categories of **variables** with respect to scope:

* **Local Variables** - Only valid in the part of the code in which they are introduces.
* **Global Variables** - Are valid outside of functions.
* **Superglobal Variables** - Are built-in variables that are always available in all scopes.
* **Static Variables** - Local variables within a function that retain their value between separate calls of the function

By default:

* Variables in a **function** are **local but not static**.
* Variables **outside** any function are **global**.

We can access and modify `global` variables like so:

```php
$x = "Hello";
function fn() {
	global $x;
	echo "$x\n";
}
```

An `unset` operation removes a specific variable, but leaves other global variables with the same name unchanged.
{:.info}

We can declare a `static` variable like so:

```php
static $count = 0;
```

## Including & Requiring Files

* `include` - This includes a file in the script but generates a **warning** if it doesn't exist.
* `require` - This includes a file in the script but generates an **error** if it doesn't exist and execution stops.

```php
include 'test.php';
```

The file we are including must be enclosed in `<? php` and `?>`.
{:.info}

If we want to ensure a file is only included **once** (to avoid errors) we can use:

* `include_once`
* `require_once`

If no **absolute path** is specified PHP will search in the following order:

1. Directories in the `include_path`.
1. The scripts directory.
1. The current working directory.