---
title: PHP Sessions
tags: COMP284 Lectures
---
As no data about a client is remembered by default **we can't track a series of requests** from coming from the same user. This can be problematic if we want to send several forms, such as on a shopping site.

## Hidden Inputs
One way of solving this is by sending the data from the last form along with the next using a **hidden input**:


`form1.php`:

```html
<form action="form2.php" method="post">
	<label>
		Item:
		<input type="text" name="item">
	</label>
</form>
```

`form2.php`:

```html
<form action="process.php" method="post">
	<label>
		Adress
		<input type="text" name="address">
	</label>
	<input
		type="hidden"
		name="item"
		value="</php echo $_REQUEST['item'] ?>"
	/>
</form>
```

As we use `$_REQUEST['item']` we can manipulate this value using `process.php`.
{:.info}

The user is able to modify these hidden fields if they want to act maliciously.
{:.error}

## Sessions
This is a way of keeping track of a user's session by using a **session identifier** which is:

* **Generated** by the **server**, when the session starts.
* **Remembered** by the **browser**.
* **Sent** by the **browser** with every further HTTP request to that server.
* **Forgotten** by the browser when the session ends, or the browser is closed.

In addition, the server can use **session variables** for storing information that relate to a session.

Session variables only store data **temporarily**. to preserve data between visits then you need to use a **persistent cookie** or a database.
{:.warning}

### Sessions vs. Cookies
Sessions:

* ID and session data are stored on the **web server**.
* Access and changes to session data are done in PHP via the `$_SESSION` array.
* Expiration **cannot** be set; it always expires when the user's close the browser or the session is ended by a script.
* The client can't manipulate the data.

Cookies:

* ID and cookies data are stored by the **web client** on the user's device.
* Acess to cookie data is done in PHP via the `$_COOKIE` array.
* Changes to cookie data are done in PHP via `setcookie`.
	* Expiration can be set via `setcookie` too.
* Web client can be manipulated.
	
	This can be used as an attack vector.
	{:.error} 

### Session Method
Creating and using sessions uses the following method:

1. Start the session:
	* `session_start()`
	* `session_id([id])`
	* `session_regenerate_id([delete_old])`
1. Maintain session data:
	* `session_start()`
	* The `$_SESSION` array.
	* `isset($_SESSION[key])`
1. End a PHP session:
	* `session_destroy()`
	* `$_SESSION = array();`
	* `session_unset()`
	* `setcookie(name, value, expires, path)`
	
### Starting a Session
#### `session_start()`

```
session_start()
```

Creates a session identifier when a session is created:

* Sets up the `$_SESSION` array that stores session variables and session data.

The function must be executed before any other header calls or output is procured.
{:.warning}

#### `session_id()`

```
session_id([id])
```

**Get** or **set** the session id for the current session:

* The constant `SID` can also be used to retrieve the current name and session id as a string suitable for adding to URLs.

#### `session_name()`

```
session_name([name])
```

Returns the name of the current session:

* If a name is given, the current session name will be replaces with the given one and the old name returned.

#### `session_regenerate_id()`

```
session_regenerate_id([delete_old])
```

Replaces the current session id with a new one:

* By default keeps the current session information stored in `$_SESSION`.
* If the optional boolean argument is `true`, then the current session information is deleted.

Regular use of this function alleviates the risk of a session being **hijacked**.
{:.warning}

### Maintaining Session Data
We can use the following methods:

* `session_start()`
* The `$_SESSION` array.
* `isset($_SESSION[key])`

like so:

```php
<?php
// counting the number of page requests in a session
// each web page contains the following PHP code
session_start();
if (!isset($_SESSION['requests']))
	$_SESSION['requests'] = 1;
else
	$_SESSION['requests']++;
echo "#Requests in this session so far: ", 
	$_SESSION['requests'], "<br>\n";
?>
```

### Ending a Session
We can end a session like so:

```php
<?
session_start();
session_unset();
if (session_id() != "" || isset($_COOKIE[session_name()]))
	// force the cookie to expire
	setcookie(session_name(), session_id(), time()-2592000, '/');
session_destroy();
?>
```

You should only end the session if the operation is successful. This saves losing all existing. 
{:.warning}

#### Close on Inactivity
The following code tracks whether a session is active and end the session if there has been no activity for more than 30 mins:

```php
if (
	isset($_SESSION['LAST_ACTIVITY']) &&
	(time() - $_SESSION['LAST_ACTIVITY'] > 1800)
) {
	session_destroy();
	$_SESSION = array();
	if (session_id() != "" ||isset($_COOKIE[session_name()]))
		setcookie(session_name(), session_id(), time()-2592000, '/');
} else {
	$_SESSION['LAST_ACTIVITY'] = time();
}	
```

We can also use this same construct to make the **session identifier** change every 30 mins[^sid]:

```php
if (!isset($_SESSION['CREATED'])) {
	$_SESSION['CREATED'] = time ();
} else if (time() - $_SESSION['CREATED'] > 1800) {
	// session started more than 30 minutes ago
	session_regenerate_id();
	$_SESSION['CREATED'] = time();
}
```

[^sid]: [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/520237/how-do-i-expire-a-php-session-after-30-minutes](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/520237/how-do-i-expire-a-php-session-after-30-minutes)

### Session Examples

* There is an improved example of the "hidden inputs" example from above using session variables [starting at slide 16](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46944/files/6811253?module_item_id=1325178).

* There is also a PRG (POST, redirect; GET) example with sessions [starting at slide 19](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46944/files/6811253?module_item_id=1325178).