---
title: PHP Regular Expressions
tags: COMP284 Lectures
---
PHP uses PCRE (Perl-compatible regular expressions). You can try out your expressions in a **live environment** at [regex101](https://regex101.com/) (ensure that PCRE2 is checked).

## PHP RE Syntax
We can use the following syntax to define regular expressions in PHP:

```php
'/a*bc/'
```

The expression is enclosed in two `/`.
{:.info}

## Quantifiers
We can request a certain number of characters:

| Quantifier | Description |
| :-- | :-- |
| `*` | Match 0 or more times. |
| `+` | Match 1 or more times. |
| `?` | Match 1 or 0 times. |
| `{n}` | Match **exactly** $n$ times. |
| `{n,}` | Match **at least** $n$ times. |
| `{n,m}` | Match **between** $n$ and $m$ times. |

These quantifiers are **greedy**:

* Match the **longest leftmost** sequence of characters possible.

We can match **lazily** by following a quantifier with a `?` character:

```php
'=/\*.*?\*/='
```

Any non-whitespace, non-backslash character can be a regex **delimiter**. `=` is used here for convenience.
{:.info}

this would match:

> x = **/* one */** y*z; /* three */

as opposed to the following using a greedy expression:

> x = **/* one */ y*z; /* three */**

## Capture Groups & Back-references
We can capture groups and use them with backreferences like so:

```php
"=<(?<c1>\w+)>/*?</\g{c1}>="
```

This captures a group of `w+` called `c1` and uses it later using `\g{c1}`.
{:.info}

This would match the **whole** string:

```
"<li><b>item</b></li>"
```

Available syntax includes:

| Expression | Description |
| :-- | :-- |
| `(regex)` | Creates a capturing sub-pattern and automatically names starting from 1. |
| `(?<name>regex)` | Creates a named capturing sub-pattern. |
| `(?:regex)` | Creates a non-capturing sub-pattern. |
| `\N`, `\gN`, `\g{N}` | Back-reference to a capturing pattern called $N$, where $N$ is a natural number. |
| `\g{name}` | Back-reference to a named capture group. |

`(?:regex)` is used to enclose alternations without making another capture group:

```php
"/(?:regex1|regex2)/"
```

## Modifiers 
Usually we might enclose our regular expression in `/` `/`. We can use the following modifiers to match in different ways like so:

```php
"/hello/i"
```

This performs a case-insensitive match.
{:.info}

| Modifier | Description |
| :-- | :-- |
| `i` | Perform case-insensitive match. |
| `s` | Treat multiline string as a single line. |
| `m` | Treat string as a set of multiple lines (multi-line mode). |

You can combine these modifiers **one after the other**.
{:.info}

## PHP Regex Functions
### `preg_match()`

```
preg_match(rx, str [,&$matches [,flags [,offset]]])
```

Attempts to match a regular expression `rx` against the string `str` starting at `offset`:

* Returns `1` is there is a match, `0` if not and `False` if there is an error.
* `$matches` is an array containing all the matching groups where group/key 0 is the full matching string.
* `flags` modify the behaviour of the function.

It can be useful to run this in the expression of an `if` statement so that your output will only run if the pattern matches.
{:.info}

### `preg_match_all()`

```
preg_match_all(rx, str, [,&$matches [,flags [,offs]]])
```

Retrieves **all matches** of the regular expression `rx` against teh string `str` starting at `offs`:

* Returns the **number of matches** and `False` in the case of an error.
* `$matches` is a **multi-dimensional** array containing all matches indexed from 0; with each match in the same format at `preg_match()`.
* `flags` modify the behaviour of the function.

### `preg_replace()`

```
preg_replace(rx, rpl, str [,lmt [, &$num]])
```

Returns the result of replacing matches of `rx` in `str` by `rpl`:

* `lmt` specifies the maximum number of replacements.
* On completion, `$num` contains the number of replacements performed.
* You can use groups captured from `str` in `rpl`.

#### `preg_replace_callback()`
You can also use `preg_replace_callback()` with the result of a function:

```php
$old = "105 degrees Fahrenheit is quite warm";

$new = preg_replace_callback(
	'/(\d+) degrees Fahrenheit/',
	function ($match) {
		return round(($match[1] - 32) * 5 / 9) . " degrees Celsius";
	},
	$old
);

echo $new;
```

```
41 degrees Celsius is quite warm
```

### `preg_split()`

```
preg_split(rx, str [,lmt [,flags]])
```

Splits `str` by the regular expression `rx` and returns the result as an array:

* `lmt` specifies the maximum number of split components.
* `flags`modify the behaviour of the function.