---
title: PHP Introduction
tags: COMP284 Lectures
---
Using CGI is **disadvantageous** as it is difficult to add a small amount of dynamic content to a web page.

PHP is a scripting language that aims to make it easy to write server-side code.

## PHP Processing 
You install PHP as a web server **plugin**:

This avoids the need to execute an external program.
{:.info}

PHP code is embedded into HTML pages using tags. This makes it easy to turn static pages into dynamic ones.

The processing follows the following method:

1. The web server receives a **client request**.
1. The web server recognises that the **client request** is for an HTML document containing **PHP code**.
1. The server executes the PHP, **substitutes output** into the HTML document; the resulting page is then sent to the client.

The client never sees the PHP code, only the HTML document that is produced.
{:.info}

## PHP "Hello, world!"
You can write this like so:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en-GB">
<head>
	<title>Hello, world!</title>
</head>
<body>
	<h1>Our First PHP Script</h1>
	<?php
		print("<p><b>Hello, world!</b></p>\n");
	?>
</body>
</html>
```

* PHP code is enclosed between `<?php` and `?>`.
* The file name must have the extension `.php`.

There is also a command line program included in php. 

This means that it can be used as a scripting language outside of a website.
{:.info}

You can run a php script using a she-bang `#!` at the start of the script, or by passing the php file as an argument.

## PHP Scripts

* They contain only statements and comments
	* No `main` or classes.
* Statements end in a semi-colon `;`.
* One line comments start with `//` or `#`.
* Multiline comments are enclosed in `/*` and `*/`.

## PHP Types
PHP has eight datatypes including:

Four **primitive types**:

* `bool`
* `int`
* `float`
* `string`

Two **compound types**:

* `array`
* `object`

Two **special types**:

* `resource`
* `NULL`

### Integers and Floats
PHP has several pre-defined mathematical functions that you can look up.

PHP also provides **pre-defined number constants**:

* `M_PI` - Pi
* `NAN` - Not a number.
* `INF` - Infinity

The last two can be returned from mathematical functions where appropriate.
{:.info}

### Booleans
When converting to boolean, the following values are "falsy":

| Value | Type |
| --: | :-- |
| `FALSE` | Boolean |
| 0 | Integer |
| 0.0 | Float |
| '0' | String |
| '' | Empty String |
| {} | An array with zero elements |
| `NULL` | Null and other `unset` variables. |
| | SimpleXML objects created from empty tags. |

All other values are considered "truthy".

When converting boolean to string:

* `TRUE` becomes "1".
* `FALSE` becomes "".

### Strings

* Strings can be single or double quoted.
* Strings can span several lines.
* **Concatenation** is denoted with `.`.
	
	This is opposed to `+` like other languages.
	{:.warning}
	
You can use substitution in double quoted strings:

```php
$title = "String Operators";
print "<title>$title</title >";
```

Which produces the following HTML:

```html
<title>String Operators</title>
```

* In single quoted strings only `\` and `'` are escaped.
* In double quoted strings all common escape codes are accepted.

## Variables
All PHP variables start with `$`, they can't start with a number and are case sensitive:

* Variables don't have to be **declared** before they are used.

	You can use a variable with the default value before is it assigned.
	{:.info}	
	
* Variables don't have to be initialised before they are used.
	* Default - generally `FALSE`, empty, or `NULL` - values are chosen.
	
They can be **assigned** like so:

```php
$student_id = 123457890;
$b = ($a = 0) + 1;
```

## Constants
You can define global **constants** with the following function:

```
define(<name>, <expression>)
```

This can be used like so:

```php
define("PI", 3.14159);
```

and you can access them like so:

```php
print "Value if PI:" . PI . "\n";
```

You can't use variable substitution with constants.
{:.warning}

## Values, Variables & Types
PHP provides several functions to find the type of an expression:

| Function | Description |
| :-- | :-- |
| string `gettype(<expr>)` | Returns the type of expr as a string. |
| bool `is_<type>(<expr>)` | Checks whether `<expr>` is of type `<type>`.
| void `var_dump(<expr>)` | Displays structured information about `<expr>` that include its type and value. |

### Type Juggling & Casting
PHP will **automatically convert** a value to the appropriate type as required by the operation applied to the value (type juggling).

We can also apply an **identity function** of the target type to force a type conversion:

$$
\text{`12'} * 1.0 \rightarrow 12.0
$$

PHP also support **explicit type casting** via `(<type>)`:

```php
$a = (bool) "foo"
print $a
```

would return:

```
TRUE
```