---
title: Introduction to Scripting Languages
tags: COMP284 Lectures
---
## Scripting Languages
Scripts are user-readable and user-modifiable programs that perform simpler operations and control the operation of other programs. 

They have the following properties:

* Program code is **present at run time** and the starting point of execution:
	* Compilation is not needed.
	* Compilation to intermediary languages may be performed behind the scenes as an **optimisation**.
* Presences of a suitable **runtime environment is required** for thee execution so scripts:
	* Includes one of:
		* Interpreter
		* Just-In-Time Compiler
		* Byte-code Compiler
		
	and a virtual machine.
* **Execution** of scripts **is typically slower** than the execution of code that has been fully pre-compiled. 
* Rich and easy to use **interface to the underlying operating system** in order to run other programs and communicate with them. 
	* Rich I/O including:
		* Pipes
		* Network Sockets
		* File I/O
* Easy **integration with larger systems**:
	* Often used to glue other systems together.
	* Can be embedded into other applications.

### Language Constructs

* Variables, functions, and methods typically **do not require type declarations**. Automatic conversion between types:
	* Strings and numbers.
* Lots of pre-defined functions and libraries.
	* Lots of pre-defined functions for the **specific purpose** the language was designed for.
* Ability to generate, load, and interpret source code at run time through an `eval` function.
	* This can lead to self modifying and running code like the following:
	
		```javascript
		var x = 2;
		var y = 6;
		var str = " if ( x > 0) { z = y / x } else { z = -1 }";
		console . log ( ' z is ', eval ( str )); // Output : z is 3
		x = 0;
		console . log ( ' z is ', eval ( str )); // Output : z is -1
		```
		
### Language Evolution
The evolution of a scripting language typically starts with a limited set of languages constructs for a **specific purpose**:

* PHP started as a set of functions for tracking web visits.

The language then accumulates more and more language constructs as it is used for a wider range of purposes:

* These additional language constructs may or may not fit well together with the original core and may duplicate existing language constructs.
* During this evolution of the language, **backward compatibility** may or may not be preserved.

Language design of scripting languages is often sub-optimal.
{:.info}