---
title: COMP111 - Properties of Searches
tags: COMP111 Lectures
---
For all algorithms there are certain properties that they can be evaluated against:

* Completeness
	* Does the algorithm always find a solution if one exists?
	
	This is true for BFS but not for DFS as cycles can stop depth first if there is a loop.
	
* Optimality
	* Does the algorithm always find a shortest path or one of lowest cost?
	
	Yes for BFS but no for DFS (neither take into account cost, just steps.)
	
* Time Complexity
	* What are the number of paths generated?/How long will it take to compute?
	
	Harder to answer. This will need to be computed
	
* Space Complexity
	* What are the maximum number of paths in memory (in frontier)?
	
	This will always be smaller or equal to the time complexity but it is still harder to answer.
	
## Time & Space Complexity

Time and space complexity are measured in terms of:

* {% raw %}<pre>\(b\)</pre>{% endraw %} - Maximum branching factor
	* The maximal number of successor states of a state in the state space.
* {% raw %}<pre>\(d\)</pre>{% endraw %} - Depth of the optimal solution
	* The length of the shortest path from the start state to a goal state.
* {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %} - Maximum depth of the state space
	* the length of the longest path in the state space (may be {% raw %}<pre>\(\infty\)</pre>{% endraw %} to to loops)
	
### Example 1 - 8 Puzzle

* {% raw %}<pre>\(b\)</pre>{% endraw %} (maximum branching factor) is 4
* {% raw %}<pre>\(d\)</pre>{% endraw %} (optimal solution) is 31
* {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %} (longest path) is {% raw %}<pre>\(\infty\)</pre>{% endraw %} as there are cycles

### Example 2 - Holiday in Romania

* {% raw %}<pre>\(b=4\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* {% raw %}<pre>\(d=3\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* {% raw %}<pre>\(m=\infty\)</pre>{% endraw %}

## Properties of Breadth First Search

The number of paths of length {% raw %}<pre>\(d\)</pre>{% endraw %} in a search tree with maximum branching factor {% raw %}<pre>\(b\)</pre>{% endraw %} is at most {% raw %}<pre>\(b^d\)</pre>{% endraw %}.
{:.info}

The number of paths of length at most {% raw %}<pre>\(d\)</pre>{% endraw %} in a search tree with maximum branching factor {% raw %}<pre>\(b\)</pre>{% endraw %} is at most {% raw %}<pre>\(1+b+b^2+\ldots + b^d\)</pre>{% endraw %}.
{:.info}

* Time complexity
	* If the shortest path to a goal state has length {% raw %}<pre>\(d\)</pre>{% endraw %} then the worst case BFS will look at: {% raw %}<pre>\[1+b+B^2+\ldots +b^d\]</pre>{% endraw %} paths before reaching a goal state.

* Space complexity
	* If the shortest path to a goal state has length {% raw %}<pre>\(d\)</pre>{% endraw %}, then in the worst case the frontier can contain {% raw %}<pre>\(b^d\)</pre>{% endraw %} paths and so the memory requirement is {% raw %}<pre>\(b^d\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

### Complexity

| Depth | Paths | Time | 
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | 1 | 1 msec |
| 1 | 11 | .01 sec | 
| 2 | 111 | .1 sec | 
| 4 | 11,111 | 11 sec |
| 6 | 10^6 | 18 sec |
| 8 | 10^8 | 31 hours |
| 10 | 10^10 | 128 days |
| 12 |10^12 | 35 years |

*Example of combinatorial explosion of a BFS at 1000 states/sec.*

## Properties of Depth First Search

* Not complete - No guarenteed to find a solution
* Not optimal - Solution is not guaranteed to be the shortest path.
* Time Complexity 
	* If the length of the longest path from the start state is {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %}, then the worst case DFS will look at: {% raw %}<pre>\[1+b+b^2+\ldots +b^m\]</pre>{% endraw %} This may be an issue as {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %} is infinite in many problems.
* Space Complexity
	* If the length of the longest path starting at a goal state is {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %}, then the worst case the frontier can contain: {% raw %}<pre>\[b\times m\]</pre>{% endraw %} paths. if {% raw %}<pre>\(m\)</pre>{% endraw %} is infinite, then the space requirement is infinite in the worst case. But if DFS finds a path to the goal state, then memory requirement is much less than for BFS.


## Summary

* DFS is complete ut expensive
* DFS is cheap in space complexity but incomplete
