---
title: COMP111 - Independent Random Variables
tags: COMP111 Lectures
---
Random variables &#92;(F&#92;) and &#92;(G&#92;) are independent if:

&#92;[\mathbf{P}(F,G)=\mathbf{P}(F)\times\mathbf{P}(G)&#92;]

That is, for all values &#92;(r&#92;) and &#92;(s&#92;):

&#92;[P(F=r,G=s)=P(F=r)\times P(G=s)&#92;]

As one's dental problems do not influence the weather, the pairs of random variables are each independent:

* &#92;(\text{Toothache},\text{Weather}&#92;)
* &#92;(\text{Catch},\text{Weather}&#92;)
* &#92;(\text{Cavity},\text{Weather}&#92;)

## Example - Weather and Dental Problems
The full joint probability distribution:

&#92;[\mathbf{P}(\text{Toothache, Catch, Cavity, Weather})&#92;]

has 32 entries. It contains four tables for the dentist variables and one for the four kinds of weather.

The number of entries comes from the &#92;(2\times2\times2\times4&#92;) of the 2 outcomes for the 4 dentist variables and the 4 outcomes of the &#92;(\text{Weather}&#92;) variable.
{:.info}

Thus we have:

* 8 probabilities for &#92;((\text{Weather}=\text{sunny})&#92;):
    * &#92;(P(\text{Weather}=\text{sunny}, \text{Toothache}=r_1,&#92;) &#92;(\text{Catch} =r_2,\text{Cavity}=r_3)&#92;)
* And so on for the other three weather types.

Clearly we can make the independence assumption that for any combination of values of the random variables &#92;(\text{Toothache, Catch, Cavity,}&#92;) the probability for &#92;(\text{Weather}&#92;). For example:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
& P(\text{Weather}=\text{sunny} \vert&#92;&#92;
& \text{Toothache}=r_1, \text{Catch} =r_2,\text{Cavity}=r_3)&#92;&#92;
=& P(\text{Weather}=\text{sunny})
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

for all &#92;(r_1,r_2,r_3\in&#92;{0,1&#92;}&#92;).

Thus equivalently:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
& P(\text{Weather}=\text{sunny} \vert&#92;&#92;
& \text{Toothache}=r_1, \text{Catch} =r_2,\text{Cavity}=r_3)&#92;&#92;
=& P(\text{Weather}=\text{sunny})\times&#92;&#92;
&P(\text{Toothache}=r_1, \text{Catch} =r_2,\text{Cavity}=r_3)
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

for all &#92;(r_1,r_2,r_3\in&#92;{0,1&#92;}&#92;).

This means that they are related proportionally.

We have seen that the join probability distribution 

&#92;[\mathbf{P}(\text{Weather, Toothache, Catch, Cavity})&#92;]

can be written as:


&#92;[\mathbf{P}(\text{Weather})\times\mathbf{P}(\text{Toothache, Catch, Cavity})&#92;]

The 32-element table for four variables can be constructed from one 4-element table and an 8-element table.

## Independence Analysis
Unfortunately this type of independence is very rare as generally things that you want to compare are inter-related. This is especially true within a single domain.
Conditional independence is much more prevalent and useful.
