---
title: COMP111 - Introduction of Random Variables
tags: COMP111 Lectures
---
Let {% raw %}<pre>\((S,P)\)</pre>{% endraw %} be a probability space. A **random variable** {% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a function {% raw %}<pre>\(F:S\rightarrow\Bbb{R}\)</pre>{% endraw %} that assigns to every {% raw %}<pre>\(s\in S\)</pre>{% endraw %} a single number {% raw %}<pre>\(F(s)\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

In all these examples {% raw %}<pre>\(S\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the sample space and {% raw %}<pre>\(P\)</pre>{% endraw %} is the probability space.
{:.info}

* Neither a variable nor random.
	* As it is the product of a function.
* English translation of **variable casuale**.

We still assume that the sample space is finite. Thus, given a random variable {% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %} from some sample space {% raw %}<pre>\(S\)</pre>{% endraw %}, the set of number {% raw %}<pre>\(r\)</pre>{% endraw %} that values of {% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %} is finite as well.

The event that {% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %} takes the value {% raw %}<pre>\(r\)</pre>{% endraw %}, that is {% raw %}<pre>\(\{s\vert F(s)=r\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}, is denoted {% raw %}<pre>\((F=r)\)</pre>{% endraw %}. the probability {% raw %}<pre>\((F=r)\)</pre>{% endraw %} of the even {% raw %}<pre>\((F=r)\)</pre>{% endraw %} is then:

{% raw %}<pre>\[P(F=r)=P(\{s\vert F(s)=r\})\]</pre>{% endraw %}

## Example 1
Let

{% raw %}<pre>\[S=\{\text{car, train, plane, ship}\}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

Then the function {% raw %}<pre>\(F:S\rightarrow \Bbb{R}\)</pre>{% endraw %} defined by:

{% raw %}<pre>\[F(\text{car})=1,\ F(\text{train})=1,\ F(\text{plane})=2,\ F(\text{ship})=2\]</pre>{% endraw %}

is a random variable.

{% raw %}<pre>\((F=1)\)</pre>{% endraw %} denotes the event {% raw %}<pre>\(\{s\in S \vert F(s) =1\} = \{\text{car, train}\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Defining a uniform probability space {% raw %}<pre>\((S,P)\)</pre>{% endraw %} by setting:

{% raw %}<pre>\[P(\text{car})=P(\text{train})=P(\text{plane})=P(\text{ship})=\frac{1}{4}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This means that we are setting each event to have the same probability.
{:.info}

Then {% raw %}<pre>\(P(F=1)=P(\{s\in S \vert F(s)=1\})=P(\{\text{car, train}\})=\frac{1}{2}\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

## Example 2
Suppose that I roll two dice. so the same sample space is:

{% raw %}<pre>\[S=\{1,2,3,4,5,6\}^2\]</pre>{% endraw %}

and {% raw %}<pre>\(P(ab)=\frac{1}{36}\)</pre>{% endraw %} for every {% raw %}<pre>\(ab\in S\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

Let 

{% raw %}<pre>\[F(ab) = a+b\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This means that we are investigating the sum of the two dice.
{:.info}

{% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %} is a random variable. This variable maps the two values {% raw %}<pre>\(ab\)</pre>{% endraw %} to the sum {% raw %}<pre>\(a+b\)</pre>{% endraw %}. 

The probability that {% raw %}<pre>\(F=r\)</pre>{% endraw %} for a number {% raw %}<pre>\(r\)</pre>{% endraw %} (say, 12) is given by:

{% raw %}<pre>\[P(F=r)=P(\{ab\vert F(ab)=r\})\]</pre>{% endraw %}

With this example:

 {% raw %}<pre>\[P(F=12)=P(\{ab\vert F(ab)=12\})=P(66)=\frac{1}{36}\]</pre>{% endraw %}
 
## Random Variables
when defining a probability distribution {% raw %}<pre>\(P\)</pre>{% endraw %} for a random variable {% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %}, we often do not specify its sample space {% raw %}<pre>\(S\)</pre>{% endraw %} by directly assign a probability to the event that {% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %} takes a certain value. Thus we directly define the probability:

{% raw %}<pre>\[P(F=r)\]</pre>{% endraw %}

of the event that {% raw %}<pre>\(F\)</pre>{% endraw %} has the value {% raw %}<pre>\(r\)</pre>{% endraw %}. Observe:

* {% raw %}<pre>\(0\leq P(F=r)\leq 1\)</pre>{% endraw %}
* {% raw %}<pre>\(\sum_{r\in \Bbb{R}}P(F=r)=1\)</pre>{% endraw %}

Thus, the events {% raw %}<pre>\((F=r)\)</pre>{% endraw %} behave in the same way as outcomes of a random experiment.

## Notation and Rules
### Negation
We write {% raw %}<pre>\(\neg(F=r)\)</pre>{% endraw %} for the event {% raw %}<pre>\(\{s\vert F(s)\neq r\}\)</pre>{% endraw %}. For example, assume the random variable {% raw %}<pre>\(\text{Die}\)</pre>{% endraw %} can take values {% raw %}<pre>\(\{1,2,3,4,5,6\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} and:

{% raw %}<pre>\[P(\text{Die}=n)=\frac{1}{6}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

for all {% raw %}<pre>\(n\in \{1,2,3,4,5,6\}\)</pre>{% endraw %} (thus we have a fair die). The {% raw %}<pre>\(\neg(\text{Die}=1)\)</pre>{% endraw %} denotes the event:

{% raw %}<pre>\[(\text{Die}=2)\vee (\text{Die}=3)\vee (\text{Die}=4)\vee (\text{Die}=5)\vee (\text{Die}=6)\]</pre>{% endraw %}

We have the following complementation rule:

{% raw %}<pre>\[P(\neg(F=r))=1-P(F=r)\]</pre>{% endraw %}

### Intersection
We can write:

{% raw %}<pre>\[(F_1=r_1,F_2=r_2)\]</pre>{% endraw %}

for {% raw %}<pre>\((F_1=r_1)\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\((F_2=r_2)\)</pre>{% endraw %}. This takes two random variables

### Union
Two represent the function OR we can write:

{% raw %}<pre>\[(F_1=r_1)\vee(F_2=r_2)\]</pre>{% endraw %}

From this we can get the law from unions:

{% raw %}<pre>\[
\begin{aligned}
P((F_1=r_1)\vee (F_2=r_2)) =& P(F_1 = r_1)+P(F_2 = r_2)\\
&-P(F_1=r_1,F_2=r_2)
\end{aligned}
\]</pre>{% endraw %}

### Conditional Probability
if {% raw %}<pre>\(P(F_2=r_2)\neq0\)</pre>{% endraw %} then:

{% raw %}<pre>\[P(F_1=r_1\vert F_2=r_2)=\frac{P(F_1=r_1,F_2=r_2)}{P(F_2=r_2)}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

This is the probability that {% raw %}<pre>\(F_1=r_1\)</pre>{% endraw %} given that {% raw %}<pre>\(F_2=r_2\)</pre>{% endraw %}.

### Product Rule
{% raw %}<pre>\[P(F_1=r_1,F_2=r_2)=P(F_1=r_1\vert F_2=r_2)\times P(F_2=r_2)\]</pre>{% endraw %}

### Symbols
Wo sometimes use symbols distinct from numbers to denote the values of random variables.

For example, for a random variable {% raw %}<pre>\(\text{Weather}\)</pre>{% endraw %} rather than using values {% raw %}<pre>\(1,2,3,4\)</pre>{% endraw %} we use:

{% raw %}<pre>\[\text{sunny, rain, cloudy, snow}\]</pre>{% endraw %}

Thus, {% raw %}<pre>\((\text{Weather}=\text{sunny})\)</pre>{% endraw %} denotes the event that it is sunny.

This is to say that random variable must give numbers as an output but we use symbols to represent these numbers.
{:.info}

To model a visit  to a dentist, we use the random variables {% raw %}<pre>\(\text{Toothache, Cavity}\)</pre>{% endraw %} and {% raw %}<pre>\(\text{Catch}\)</pre>{% endraw %} (the dentist's steel probe catches in the tooth) that all the take values 1 and 0 (for `True` or `False`). 

For example, ({% raw %}<pre>\(\text{Toothache}=1\)</pre>{% endraw %}) states that the person has toothache and ({% raw %}<pre>\(\text{Toothache}=0\)</pre>{% endraw %}) states that the person does not have a toothache.
