---
title: COMP111 - Satisfiability of Propositional Formulas
tags: COMP111 Lectures
---
A propositional formula is satisfiable if there exist an interpretation under which it is true.

### Example 1
The formula {% raw %}<![CDATA[\((p\wedge\neg p)\)]]>{% endraw %} is not satisfiable, because:

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[I(p\wedge\neg p)=0\]]]>{% endraw %}

for all interpretations {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(I\)]]>{% endraw %}:

| {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(p\)]]>{% endraw %} | {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(\neg p\)]]>{% endraw %} | {% raw %}<![CDATA[\((p\wedge\neg p)\)]]>{% endraw %} |
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 0 | 1 | 0 |

As you can see from the table there is no case in which the case is satisfiable. 

### Example 2
There are some cases which don't require the truth table to be parsed in order to find out if it is satisfiable. See this question:

Is the formula, {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(P=(p_1\Rightarrow(p_2\wedge\neg p_2))\)]]>{% endraw %} satisfiable.

To see this, simply choose any interpretation {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(I\)]]>{% endraw %} with {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(I(p_1)=0\)]]>{% endraw %}. Then {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(I(P)=1\)]]>{% endraw %} and we have found an interpretation {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(I\)]]>{% endraw %} that makes {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(P\)]]>{% endraw %} true.

The same argument shows that every formula of the form {% raw %}<![CDATA[\((p_1\Rightarrow Q)\)]]>{% endraw %} is satisfiable.

There are also other combinations where you can prove that they are satisfiable without working any values. E.g.:

{% raw %}<![CDATA[\[(p_1\Leftrightarrow Q)\]]]>{% endraw %}

such that {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(p_1\)]]>{% endraw %} does not occur in {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(Q\)]]>{% endraw %} is satisfiable.

## Deciding Satisfiability 
* {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(P\)]]>{% endraw %} is satisfiable if {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(I(P)=1\)]]>{% endraw %} for some interpretation {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(I\)]]>{% endraw %}.
* There are {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(2^n\)]]>{% endraw %} interpretations if {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(P\)]]>{% endraw %} has {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %} propositional atoms.
* Thus, to check whether {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(P\)]]>{% endraw %} is satisfiable directly using truth tables, a table with {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(2^n\)]]>{% endraw %} rows is needed.
* This is not practical, even for small {% raw %}<![CDATA[\(n\)]]>{% endraw %}
	* Another case of combinatorial explosion.

There has been great progress in developing very fast satisfiability algorithms (called **SAT solvers**) that can deal with formulas with bery large numbers of propositional atoms (using heuristics).
