---
title: COMP108 - Dynamic Programming Algorithms - 1 - Fibonacci Numbers
tags: COMP108 Lectures
---
Dynamic programming allows for more efficient implantation of divide and conquer algorithms.

## Fibonacci Numbers
This is the definition for the Fibonacci numbers:

$$
F(n)=\begin{cases}
1 & \text{if } n=0\text{ or } 1\\
F(n-1)+F(n-2) & \text{if } n> 1
\end{cases}
$$

and the code that we had before:

```
Algorithm F(n)
	if n == 0 OR n == 1 then
		return 1
	else
		return F(n - 1) + F(n - 2)
```

This code calculates particular Fibonacci numbers many times which is inefficient.
{:.warning}

## Memorisation
To improve on this we can memorise new Fibonacci numbers so that we don't have to calculate them again:

1. Store $F(n)$ somewhere after we have computed its value.
1. Afterwards, we don't need to re-compute $F(n)$ as we can retrieve its value from the memory.

```
Main Algorithm
	set v[0] = 1
	set v[1] = 1
	for i = 2 to n do
		v[i] = -1	// initialise all other values to -1
	output F(n)
```

```
Algorithm F(n)
	if v[n] < 0 then
		v[n] = F(n - 1) + F(n - 2)
	return v[n]
```

This significantly reduces the amount of calculation.
{:.info}

## Compute $F(n)$ in Advance
The 2$^{nd}$ version still makes many function calls. Making many function calls negatively effects performance. To improve this we can compute the values from the **bottom-up**.

```
Algorithm F(n)
	set v[0] = 1
	set v[1] = 1
	for i = 2 to n do
		v[i] = v[i - 1] + v[v - 2]
	return v[n]
```

## Summary

* Write down a formula that relates a solution of a problem with those of sub-problems:
	* $F(n)=F(n-1)+F(n-2)$
* Index the sub-problems so that they can be **stored** and **retrieved** easily in a table.
* Fill the table in some **bottom-up** manner:
	* Start filling the solution of the smallest problem.
	* This ensures that when we solve a particular sub-problem, the solutions of all smaller sub-problems on which it depends are available.