---
title: COMP108 - Greedy Algorithm - 1 - Knapsack Problem
tags: COMP108 Lectures
---
The process of the greedy algorithm is explained in this lecture: 

* [COMP111 - Informed Strategies]({{site.baseurl}}/comp111/lectures/2020/10/27/2)

The main idea is to bin pack using the largest items first.
{:.info}

Greedy algorithm doesn't always find an optimal solution but it is easy to implement. 

## Knapsack Problem
You want to steal the best items from a house optimising for:

* Least Weight
* Most Value

Formally this can be written like so:

Given $n$ items with weights $w_1,w_2,\ldots,w_n$, values $v_1,v_2,\ldots,v_n$ and a knapsack with capacity $W$.

Find the **most valuable** subset of items that can fit into the knapsack.

### Exhaustive Algorithm
Approach:

* Try every subset of $n$ given items.
* Compute total wight of each subset.
* Compute total value of those subsets that do not exceed knapsack's capacity.
* Pick the subset that has the largest value.

Analysis:

* There are $2^n-1$ subsets to consider.
	* This is exponential in $n$.

#### Example
Consider the following values:

* Item 1
	* $w=10$
	* $v=60$
* Item 2
	* $w=20$
	* $v=100$
* Item 3
	* $w=30$
	* $v=120$
	
* Knapsack
	* Capacity $=50$
	
One method of optimising would be to iterate through each combinations of subsets that fit in the knapsack and select the set with the most value:

| Subset | Weight | Value |
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| $\emptyset$ | 0 | 0 |
| {1} | 10 | 60 |
| {2} | 20 | 100 |
| {3} | 30 | 120 |
| {1, 2} | 30 | 160 |
| {1, 3} | 40 | 180 |
| **{2, 3}** | **50** | **220** |
| {1, 2, 3} | 60 | N/A |

An issue with this method is that the combinations grow exponentially with additional items.
{:.warning}

### Greedy Algorithm
#### Example
Consider the following values:

* Item 1
	* $w=10$
	* $v=60$
* Item 2
	* $w=20$
	* $v=100$
* Item 3
	* $w=30$
	* $v=120$
	
* Knapsack
	* Capacity $=50$
	
Pick the item with the next largest value if total weight $\leq$ capacity.
{:.info}

Result:

* Item 3 is picked, total value = 120, total weight = 30.
* Item 2 is picked, total value = 220, total wight = 50.
* Item 1 cannot be picked.

This happens to be optimal.
{:.info}

#### Time Complexity
First the values need to be sorted. This takes:

$$O(n\log n)$$

#### Completeness
This algorithm **doesn't** always give an optimal solution. Using other modifiers like $\frac v w$ also won't give optimal solutions.

#### Approximation Ratio
No matter the input, if a greedy algorithm has an **approximation ratio** of $\frac1 2$, it will always select a subset with a total value of **at least** $\frac 1 2$ of the optimal solution.