---
title: COMP108 - Queues & Stacks - 2
tags: COMP108 Lectures
---
## Stacks
The following are the operations on stacks:

* **Push** - Insert element tot he location 1 beyond top.
* **Pop** - Delete element from the top.

The stack has one pointer that points to the top-most data in the stack.

* Push
	* Increment `top` by 1 and save the data to `S[top]`.
* Pop
	* Retrieve data from `S[top]` and decrement `top` by 1.
	
You need to check if the stack is empty before popping and the opposite for pushing.
{:.info}

### Pseudo Code - Infinite Size

```
Push(S,x)
top++
S[top] = x
```

```
Pop(S)
if top == 0 then
	stack is EMPTY
else 
begin
	x = S[top]
	top--
	return x
end
```

### Pseudo Code - Limited Size

```
Push(S,x)
if top == size then
	stack is FULL
else
begin
	top++
	S[top] = x
end
```

### Post-fix Expressions with Stacks
You can use the stack to compute mathematical operations. This is the case if you use reverse Polish notation. This style of notation makes the precedence implicit.

#### Method

1. Rad the next token from the expressions which may be operator or operand.
1. If token is operand, PUSH it to stack.
1. If token is operator;
	* POP two operand from stack.
	* Operate on the two operands.
	* PUSH result back to stack.
1. If expression is not exhausted, go back to step 1.
1. If expression is exhausted, evaluation finished and answer is on top of stack.

##### Example
Evaluate `10 3 2 * - 5 *`

| Expression | Stack |
| :-- | :-- |
| 10 3 2 * - 5 * | |
| 3 2 * - 5 * | 10 |
| 2 * - 5 * | 10, 3 |
| * - 5  * | 10 , 3, 2 |
| - 5 * | 10, 6 -  *Push top two, complete operand, push result.* |
| 5 * | 4 -  *Push top two, complete operand, push result.* |
| * | 4, 5 |
| | 20 -  *Push top two, complete operand, push result.* |

### Convert Infix to Postfix Expression Using Stack
Whenever an operator is popped, output it.

1. Read the next token from the expression which may be operator, operand, ( or ).
	* If token is operand, OUTPUT it. 
	* If token is (, PUSH it on the stack.
	* If token is ), POP from the stack until matching (.
	* If token is operator, POP from stack until you see one of the following:
		* An operator with same/lower precedence.
		* An opening (.
		* The stack is empty.
	* PUSH the operator on stack.
1. If expression is not exhausted, go to step 1.
1. If expression is exhausted, POP rest of stack.