---
title: COMP111 - Tutorial 1
tags: COMP111 Tutorials
---
Covering the tutorial sheets from week 1. The tutorial leader's email is [F.Alves@liverpool.ac.uk](mailto:F.Alves@liverpool.ac.uk).

1. The leader chose to cover one of the options which was football.
	* Performance Measure
		* Games won, goals scored.
	* Environment
		* Football pitch, the players, the ball.
	* Actuators
		* Legs, head.
	* Sensors
		* Visual, hearing, pressure.
	* Classification
		* Partially observable environment as they can't see what is behind them and they have to memorise the positions of the players that they can't see.
		* Stochastic as there is uncertainty about the state that will come from performing an action
		* Sequential as the current decision could affect all future decisions.
		* Dynamic environment as other players are acting while you make your decision.
		* Continuous as there is no fixed states for the positions.
1. Refer to the textbook or lecture notes.
1. For a path \$$a_0 \rightarrow a_1 \rightarrow a_2 \rightarrow a_3\$$, the length of the path is 3 as that is the number of actions that need to be performed.
	* When listing paths you can list them by length
		* 0 : a
		* 1 : ab, ac, ad
		* 2 : abe, ace, ade
		* 3 : abef, acef, adef
		
	This may help with drawing search trees.

	* 
	
	```mermaid
	graph LR
	a --> ab
	a --> ac
	a --> ad
	ab --> abe
	ac --> ace
	ad --> ade
	abe --> abef
	ace --> acef
	ade --> adef
	```
1. 
	* Paths
		* 0 : a
		* 1 : ab
		* 2 : aba, abc
		* 3 : abab
		* 4 : ababa, ababc
	* Search graph
	
	```mermaid
	graph LR
	a --> ab
	ab --> aba
	ab --> abc
	aba --> abab
	abab --> ababa
	abab --> ababc
	ababc .-> A[ ]
	```
	You should draw the trailing arrow to indicate that the graph has bee truncated.
	
	
	Search graphs should be drawn with the whole path at each level as it shows the full search at each level.
	{:.info}
	
1. Similar to 3. and 4.
1. 
	* This problem is very large so I will describe the result
		* The set of \$$S\$$ states are all 16 or \$$4^4\$$ states that exist as a subset of the set \$$N = \{ 1,2,3,4 \}\$$
		* The start state \$$S_{start}\$$ is an empty subest \$$\{ \phi \}\$$ with a sum of zero.
		* The set of goal states \$$S_{goal}\$$ are all the subsets which add to 6
		* The set of actions \$$A\$$ are any addition or subtraction of a number that is in the set.
		* The cost function for each action should just be one such that the shortest route from \$$S_{start}\$$ is achieved.
	* The search graph starts at level 1 with the empty list and then each subsequent level adds an additional item to the list via an action which adds or subtracts an item from the set:
	
		```mermaid
		graph TD
		A[phi 0] --> |a1| B[<1> 1]
		A --> |+2| C[<2> 2]
		A --> |+3| D[<3> 3]
		A --> |+4| E[<4> 4]
		B --> |+2| F[<1,2> 3]
		B --> |+3| G[<1,3> 4]
		B --> |+4| H[<1,4> 5]
		C --> |+1| F
		C --> |+3| I[<2,3> 5]
		C --> |+4| J[<2,4> 6]
		D --> |+1| G
		D --> |+2| I
		D --> |+4| K[<3,4> 7]
		E --> |+1| H
		E --> |+2| J
		E --> |+3| K
		F .-> L[ ]
		G .-> M[ ]
		H .-> N[ ]
		I .-> O[ ]
		J .-> P[ ]
		K .-> Q[ ]
		```
		
		As you can see this is very tedious indeed.
