---
title: COMP107 - Seminar 6
tags: COMP107 Seminars
---

## Assignment 2

### ER Designs

* Always have a relationship on connections between two entities and never have two consecutive relationships.

* Don't use arrowheads as there are no flows.

* There should be no shared attributes.

* Weak entities should be denoted by a weak relationship to denote the parent
  * They are allowed to be in multiple relations but should have one owner.

* Attributes should not represent values but types instead
* Relations should be one to one ideally.

## Assignment 3

We should prepare a presentation on the project that we have been working on in Assignment 1 and 2.

* This will be a product pitch.
* Should be 10 minutes in length.

It should cover the contents of assignment one. There should also be a reduced EER diagram for technical questions.

We should prepare one question each for a Q&A. Focus on:

* Ethical issues.
* Issues in the EER diagram.

Feedback will be given in a form.

This is available today. Deadline for the slides will be on 7th January.
{:.info}

## Assignment 4

Still to do are the:

* Self reflection on the group work.
  * In the form of a survey.
  * Deadline now on 9th January with link on week 11.
* Poster on cyber-ethics topic.
  * Deadline now 29th January. 

### Poster

Should be for the purpose of proposing to a general audience in a visually appealing style.

* You should create a poster on a cyber-ethics topic. 
  * Presented via a 2 min video in a QR code.
* The topic it of our choice in cyber-ethics and security.

#### Enid Mumford Prize

50 posters will be shortlisted for the prize. They will be displayed at the "ignite your future" event.