---
title: COMP218 - Preliminaries of Automata Theory & Set Theory
tags: COMP218 Lectures
---

## Set Theory Recap

* $\emptyset \\{\emptyset\\}$
	* The empty set or a set containing the empty set.
* $\\{a_1,a_2,\ldots,a_n\\}$
	* This is a set.
* $a\in A,B\subseteq A$
	* $a$ in in $A$ and $B$ is a subset of $A$.
* $A\cup B,A\cap B,A\backslash B$
	* Sum, intersection and difference.
* $2^A=\\{B\vert B\subseteq A \\}=\\{B:B\subseteq A\\}$
	* Denotes all the subsets of a given set.
* $(a_1,a_2,\ldots,a_n)$
	* This is sequence, not a set, due to the round brackets.
	* Order and repetition doesn't matter in sets.
	
## Problems
Problems which have binary answers are called decisions problems. We will be focusing on decision problems not other types of problem.

We can reduce a problem to a decision problem to make it easier to solve.

### Example of Reducing a Problem
Consider the following boolean formula:

$$(x'\vee y' \vee z)\wedge(\neg x \vee y \vee \neg z)$$

We want to find which values of true $\top$ and false $\bot$ give an output of true.

We can use the following methods:

* Guess and then reduce the formula.

## Alphabets and Strings
Strings are a list of characters from a finite set. They can also be called words. To define strings, we start with an alphabet.

An alphabet is a finite set of symbols.
{:.info}

You could have the following alphabets:

* $\Sigma_1=\\{a,b,\ldots,z\\}$ - The set of letters in english
* $\Sigma_2=\\{0,1,\ldots,9\\}$ - The set of base 10 digits.

### Strings
> A string over alphabet $\Sigma$ is a finite sequence of symbols in $\Sigma$.

For example:

* `abfbz` is a string over $\Sigma_1$.
* `9023` is a string over $\Sigma_2$.

The empty string is denoted by $\varepsilon$
{:.info}

We write $\Sigma^*$ for the set of all strings over $\Sigma$.
{:.info}

We write $\Sigma^+$ for the set of all non-empty strings.
{:.info}

### Languages
A language is a set of strings over the same alphabet. Languages define "yes/no" problems.

Consider the following example:

* $L_1=$ all strings that contain the sub-string `to`.
* $\Sigma_1=\\{a,b,\ldots,\\}$

`stop`, `to` and `toe` are in $L_1$

$\varepsilon$, `oyseter` are on in $L_1$

Therefore:

$$L_1=\{x\in \Sigma^*_1 \vert x \text{ contains the substring } \mathtt{to}\}$$

Another language could be:

$$L_2=\{s\# s \vert s\in \{a,b,\ldots,z\}*\}$$

This is any number of letters then a hash then any number of letters: `ajdj#kjd`
{:.info}
