---
title: Parsing Context Free Grammars
tags: COMP218 Lectures
---

## Parsing

* We can use a brute force method like BFS to search if an input is in the language.
	* This is not ideal as it produces an exponentially large tree.
	* If input is not in the language parsing will never stop.

### When to Stop
We could try to aid the previous method by implementing the following:

$$
\lvert\text{derived string}\rvert>\lvert\text{input}\rvert
$$

This can be problematic as:

* Strings can shrink due to $\epsilon$ productions
* There can be loops in the productions.

#### Removal of $\epsilon$-Productions
A variable $N$ is **nullable** if it can derive the empty string:

$$
N\overset*\Rightarrow\epsilon
$$

1. Identify all nullable variables $N$.
	
	This includes all productions that point to nullable productions.
	{:.info}
1. Remove all $\epsilon$-Productions carefully (while adding extra productions to compensate for this).

	For every nullable $N$:
	
	* If you see $X\rightarrow\alpha N\beta$, add $X\rightarrow\alpha\beta$
	* If you see $N\rightarrow\epsilon$, remove it.
1. If start variable $S$ is nullable:
	1. Add a net start variable $S'$.
	1. Add special productions $S'\rightarrow S\vert\epsilon$.

#### Removal of Unit Productions
A **unit production** is a production of the form:

$$A\rightarrow B$$

For example:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S&\rightarrow0S1\vert1S01\vert T\\
T&\rightarrow S\vert R\vert\epsilon\\
R&\rightarrow 0SR
\end{aligned}
$$

```mermaid
graph LR
S --> T
T --> S & R
```

1. If there is a cycle of unit productions:

	$$A\rightarrow B\rightarrow C \rightarrow A$$
	delete it and replace everything with $A$.
	
	This would give the following graph and productions:
	
	```mermaid
	graph LR 
	S --> R
	```
	
	$$
	\begin{aligned}
	S&\rightarrow0S1\vert1S01\vert R\vert\epsilon\\
	R&\rightarrow 0SR
	\end{aligned}
	$$
	
1. Replace every chain:
	
	$$
	A\rightarrow B\rightarrow C\rightarrow \alpha
	$$
	
	by $A\rightarrow \alpha, B\rightarrow \alpha,C\rightarrow \alpha$. 
	
	This would give the following productions:
	
	$$
	\begin{aligned}
	S&\rightarrow0S1\vert1S01\vert 0SR\vert\epsilon\\
	R&\rightarrow 0SR
	\end{aligned}
	$$

### Complete Method
1. Eliminate $\epsilon$ productions.
1. Eliminate unit productions.
1. Try all possible derivations via BFS but stop parsing when:

	$$
	\lvert\text{derived string}\rvert>\lvert\text{input}\rvert
	$$

The order of these steps is important as eliminating $\epsilon$ productions can introduce unit productions.
{:.warning}