---
title: COMP218 - Probabilistic CFGs
tags: COMP218 Lectures
---
* A PCFG is a probabilistic version of a CFG where each production has a probability.
* Probabilities of all productions rewriting a given non-terminal must add up to 1, defining a distribution for each non-terminal.
* String generation is now probabilistic where production probabilities are used to nondeterministically select a production for rewriting a given non-terminal.

This allows us to find the most likely meaning of a sentence in ambiguous languages.
{:.info}

## Probabilistic Context Free Grammars
Each production is is assigned a probability. For **each** non-terminal this probability must add up to 1:

| Production | Probability |
| :-- | --: |
| $S\rightarrow NPVP$ | 0.8 |
| $S\rightarrow Aux NPVP$ | 0.1 |
| $S\rightarrow VP$ | 0.1 |

### Parse Tree Probability
The **probability of a parse tree** is the **product of all the production** probabilities used. 

* If **multiple parse trees** are valid then we interpret the meaning from the parse tree with the **greatest probability**.

## Probabilistic CYK
In addition to storing the non-terminal in each cell, we also need to store the probability:

* Cell $ij$ contains the most probable parse tree of each non-terminal that can generate the part of the input word from $i$ through $j$ together with its associated probability.

### Probabilistic Chomsky Normal Form Conversion
When transforming the grammar to CNF, we set the production probabilities to preserve the probability of derivations.

### Parsing CYK Tables

* Use $\max$ to combine probabilities of multiple parse trees in each cell.
* The probability of generating a given sentence is the sum of all probabilities of multiple parse tree in each cell.

#### Sentence Probability

```
For all cells in last row
	If there is a production A -> xi with probability p
	 Put A:p in table cell ii
For cells st in other rows (going bottom to top)
	If there is a production A -> BC with probability p
		where B:pB is in cell sj and C:pC is in cell (j + 1)t and
			A:pA in cell st (if not present assume pA = 0)
		Update  A:pA + p * pB * pC in cell st
```

#### Most Likely Parse Tree

```
For all cells in last row
	If there is a production A -> xi with probability p
		Put A;p in table cell ii
For cells st in other rows (going bottom up)
	If there is a production A -> BC with probability p
		where B:pB is in cell sj and C:pC is in cell (j + 1)t and
			A:pA in cell st (if not present assume pA=0)
		Update A:max(pA, p * pB * pC) in cell st
```