---
title: The Chomsky Hierarchy
tags: COMP218 Lectures
---
This is the order of how powerful various languages are in comparison to each-other.

## Unrestricted Grammars
These grammars are made of a string of variables and terminals that lead to a string of variables and terminals like so:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S&\rightarrow aBc\\
aB&\rightarrow cA\\
Ac&\rightarrow d
\end{aligned}
$$

This is very similar to context free grammars.
{:.info}


### Natural Language Processing
A language $L$ is Turing-acceptable if and only if $L$ is generated by an unrestricted grammar:

* Context-free grammars are not sufficient to capture all natural languages.
* Unrestricted grammars are sufficient, but too complex to be used in natural language processing (parsing is undecidable).

## Context-Sensitive Grammars
These are made from a string of variables and terminals that lead to a string of variables and terminals, however for:

$$
u\rightarrow v
$$

The size of $u$ must the less than, or equal to, $v$:

$$
\lvert u\rvert\leq\lvert v\rvert
$$

For example, the language $\\{a^nb^nc^n\\}$ is context-sensitive:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S&\rightarrow abc\vert aAbc\\
Ab&\rightarrow bA\\
Ac &\rightarrow Bbcc\\
bB &\rightarrow Bb\\
aB &\rightarrow aa\vert aaA
\end{aligned}
$$

### Linear-Bounded Automaton (LBA)
The computational version of context-sensitive grammars are LBAs.

These are Turing machines that can only write to the tape space reserved for the input string:

* There are left and right-hand markers that the input string lie between.

An example of languages accepted by LBAs are:

$$
L=\{a^nb^nc^n\}
$$

and 

$$
L=\{a^{n!}\}
$$

* LBAs are more powerful than PDAs
* LBAs are less powerful than Turing machines.

LBAs allow us to find loops as there is a limit on the number of states it can be in.
{:.info}


### Context-Sensitive Languages
A language $L$ is context sensitive if an only if $L$ is accepted by a linear-bounded automaton.

There are languages which are **recursive** but **not context sensitive**.
{:.info}

The following language is decidable but not context-sensitive:

$$
L_d=\{\langle B\rangle\vert B \text{ is an LBA and }\langle B\rangle \notin L(B)\}
$$

This means that $B$ is a LBA that isn't in the language of $B$.
{:.info}

It is decidable by the following program:

1. Check if input $x=\langle B\rangle$ for some LBA $B$, if not **reject**.
1. Run $B$ on input $\langle B\rangle$, if accepts then **reject**, otherwise **accept**.


**Proof by contradiction**:

Suppose LBA $$B^*$$ recognises $$L_d$$ ($$B^*$$ is in the language $$L(B^*)$$):

* If $$\langle B^*\rangle\notin L(M^*)$$ then $$\langle B^*\rangle\in L(B^*)$$.
* If $$\langle B^*\rangle\in L(B^*)$$ then $$\langle B^*\rangle\notin L(B^*)$$.

## The Chomsky Hierarchy
The languages we have seen so far are organised in the following hierarchy (with the most expressive and complex at the top):

* Recursively Enumerable
	* Recursive
		* Context-Sensitive
			* Context-Free
				* Deterministic Context-Free
					* Regular

The number of all possible languages is $2^{\Sigma^*}$ and the complement of this are unrecognisable languages.