---
title: COMP218 - Definition of Regular Expressions
tags: COMP218 Lectures
---
## String Concatenation
This is the **product** of two words. It is obtained by appending them together to form one long word.

```
s = abb
t = bab
st = abbbab
ts = bababb
```

It is non-commutative.
{:.info}

These strings can be defined formally:

$$s=x_1\ldots x_n , t=y_1\ldots y_m$$

$$st=x_1\ldots x_ny_1\ldots y_m$$

There is also some notation:

* $s^k$ - The string $s$ repeated $k$ times.
* $\vert s\vert$ - The length of the string.

### Concatenation of Languages
This operation can be extended to languages:

* The **concatenation** of languages $L_1$ and $L_2$ is:

	$$L_1L_2=\\{st\vert s\in L_1,t\in L_2\\}$$
* The **$n^{\text{th}}$ power** of $L^n$ is:

	$$L^n=\\{s_1s_2\ldots s_n\vert s_1,s_2,\ldots,s_n\in L\\}$$
* The **union** of $L_1$ and $L_2$ is:

	$$L_1\cup L_2=\\{s\vert s\in L_1 \text{ or } s\in L_2\\}$$
	
#### Example
For the following languages:

* $L_1\\{0,01\\}$
* $L_2\\{\epsilon,1,11,111,\ldots\\}$

you would get the following results:

* $L_1L_2=\\{0,01,011,0111,\ldots\\}$
* $L_1^2=\\{00,001,010,0101\\}$
	
	This is all the combinations of the strings `0` and `01`.
	{:.info}
* $L_1\cup L_2=\\{0,01,\epsilon,1,11,111,\ldots\\}$

## Operations on Languages
See [Set Theory, Kleene Star & DNF]({{site.baseurl}}/comp218/tutorials/2021/10/01/1.html) for additional examples.

* $L^*=L^0\cup L^1 \cup L^2\cup\ldots$
	* This is all the strings made up of all combinations of $L$, including the empty string.
	
		The number of words in each length of expansion follows the Fibonacci sequence.
		{:.info}

### Combining Languages
We can construct languages by starting with simple ones, like $\\{0\\},\\{1\\}$ and combining them. Here are two languages and their equivalent regular expressions:

* $\\{0\\}(\\{0\\}\cup\\{1\\})^*$ - All strings that start with `0`.

	```
	0(0 + 1)*
	```
* $(\\{0\\}\\{1\\}^\*)\cup(\\{1\\}\\{0\\}^\*)$ - `0` followed by any number of `1`s or `1` followed by any number of `0`s.
	
	```
	01* + 10*
	```
	
The order of operations is like so: `*`,`.`,`+`.
{:.info}

## Regular Expressions
A regular expression over $\Sigma$ is an expression formed using the following rules:

* The symbols $\emptyset$ and $\epsilon$ are regular expressions.
* Ever $a$ in $\Sigma$ is a regular expression.
* If $R$ and $S$ are regular expressions, so are $R+S$, $RS$ and $R^*$.

> Any language corresponding to a regular expression is called **regular**. The set of all of them define the **class of regular languages**.
