---
title: COMP105
tags: COMP105
---
# Lecture 7-1
## Recursion
There is no such thing as a while loop in Haskell so you must use recursion to complete the same task. This links into Assignment 1 as it leans heavily on recursion.

### Factorial
A recursive function is one that calls itself:

```haskell
factorial n = if n > 1
				then n * factorial (n - 1)
				else 1
```

A recursive function has:

* A base case.
	* The `else` case is the base case and is the state where recursion stops.
* One or more recursive rules that move us closer to the base case. When the base case is reached then the program will terminate.
	* The rule is calling ourself with `n - 1`
		* This makes progress to the base case as you are making `n` smaller and getting closer to 0.
		
#### Result of Factorial

```haskell
factorial 4
> 4 * factorial 3
> 4 * 3 * factorial 2
> 4 * 3 * 2 * factorial 1
> 4 * 3 * 2 * 1
> 24
```

A good way to debug smaller iterations is to expand and follow the iterations to find the issue.

### Factorial Using Pattern Matching
You can use pattern matching to remove the `if` in a recursive function:

```haskell
factorial 1 = 1
factorial n = n * factorial (n - 1)
```

This is possible as Haskell processes functions from top to bottom. This means that first it will check if the argument matches 1 and if not fall through to the next case.

Another simple example:

```haskell
f 1 = 1
f 3 = 2
f x = 0
```

If the pattern matching isn't exhaustive then you may get an error if an unmapped input is supplied. An **exhaustive function** maps all inputs.

This style of pattern matching is similar to a case select.

### Base Cases
Every function must have a base case:

* It gives a stopping condition for the recursion.
* It is usually the simplest case.
* You can have more than one base case.

Recursion with no base case will never terminate.

### Comparison to Imperative Languages

```haskell
while (condition)
{
	<lots of computation>
}
```

* **Base cases** are like the *stopping condition*.
* **Recursive rules** do the *computation*.
* Anything you can do in a loop can be done by recursion but there is no simple way to translate between the two.

## Exercises
1.  ```haskell
	smallPrime 2 = True
	smallPrime 3 = True
	smallPrime 5 = True
	smallPrime 7 = True
	smallPrime x = Fase
	```
	
1. ```haskell
	sumUpTo 1 = 1
	sumUpTo n = n + sumUpTo(n - 1)
	```