---
title: COMP122 - Input & Output (I/O) - 2
tags: COMP122 Labs
---
There are many I/O classes, view the full Oracle I/O tutorial [here](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io/).

## Scanner
`java.util.Scanner` splits up an input into tokens that can be read one at a time.

You can scan through these using the `has.Next()` and look for specific types using other methods:

```java
double sum = 0;
try (Scanner scan = new Scanner("20.40 notadouble 30.45 gawef 49.15")) {
	while(scan.hasNext()) {
		if(scan.hasNextDouble()) {
			sum += scan.nextDouble();
		}
		else {
			scan.next();
		}
	}
}
System.out.println(sum);
```

By using a `try` with resource, Java will close the Scanner after is is finished being used.

### `Scanner` vs `Reader`
`Scanner` has pretty all of the functionality of `BufferedReader`, including a `nextLine()` function that allows you to break up a file line by line and skip the remaining tokens on a given line. That said, it is slower and more expensive than `BufferedReader`, which is the preferred option if you just want text. Further, the `nextLine()` functionality can make the scanning process messy, as it can potentially skip a lot of tokens, and was not really designed for the use case we discussed last week. A common use case is thus to use a `BufferedReader` to read a file in as `String`s, and then use a `Scanner` to break these Strings into tokens.

## BufferedWriter
To write to a file you can use the following example code:

```java
String test = "This is a test."
try(BufferedWriter bw = Files.newBufferedWriter(outPath)) {
	bw.write(test);
}
```

By using a `try` with resource, the file is written out when the `try` has executed.

To force the buffer to be written use `bw.flush()`.
{:.info}

You should avoid closing the stream until you are sure that you are done writing to a file.
{:.warning}