---
title: Input & Output (I/O)l - 1
tags: COMP122 Labs
---
Due to the large number of I/O classes in `java.io.Files`, there is a class called:

```java
java.nio.Files
```

This class consists of several static function calls that cater to **common** use cases. 

You should look in this class before looking elsewhere.
{:.info}

## Reading from File

A classic approach to reading from a text file uses a `BufferedReader` to read the file line by line, and looks something like this:

```java
File file = new File(filePathAsString);
try(BufferedReader br = Files.newBufferedReader(file.toPath())) {
    String str = "";
    while ((str = br.readLine()) != null) {
        //do some logic with str
    }
} catch(IOException ioe) {
    throw ioe;
}
```

1. The first line of this code creates a `java.io.File` class from a file path String (e.g. “myDirectory/myFile.txt”).
1. The second line uses the `Files.newBufferedReader` method to instantiate a `BufferedReader`. It takes as its first argument the `Path` object associated to a file, and then allows for optional parameters that alter things like the character set. We omit these so it will have default settings and character set, UTF-8. This line is an example of try with resources, which is syntactic sugar for a lengthy try/catch construct.

	By declaring `br` inside the try, we ensure that it will be closed, which prevents resource leaks. If we didn’t use try with resources, we’d need to call `br.close()` in a finally block.
	{:.info}
1. The third line just initializes an empty String.
1. The strange looking fourth line tries to read the next line of the file into `str` using `BufferedReader`'s `readLine` method. Once this operation is performed, the result of that assignment is `null` checked, and if `str` has become `null` we know we’ve reached the end of the file. So, this is just a loop that says read every line in as a `String` until the end of file.

	`readLine()` discards the trailing newline (`\n`), so if you wanted to reproduce the file’s content exactly you would need to add this back to the string.
	{:.info}
1. The code enclosed by the while loop is where you would do your logic using the newly read `str`. There is then a catch block that throws an `IOException` if the `BufferedReader` runs into one.

The code above is a perfectly functional way to handle file I/O, but `java.nio.file.Files` offers a couple of simpler alternatives to cover this use case.
{:.warning}

### Using `java.nio.file.Files`
#### Lines as an `ArrayList`
The first, and what is probably most useful, is `Files.readAllLines(path)`, which returns a List of every line, in order. That looks like this:

```java
File file = new File(filePathAsString);
ArrayList<String> yourList = (ArrayList<String>) Files.readAllLines(file.toPath());
```

In two lines of code we now have every line of the file, ordered, in an `ArrayList` we can traverse with a simple `for` loop. This code practically is just a tidier repackaging of the code above, where the inner loop adds `str` to a `List<String>` initialized as empty before the try.

#### Original File as String
Another two-liner if you just want the whole file as one big String with the white space and new lines of the file preserved, is given below:

```java
File file = new File(filePathAsString);
String yourFilesContent = Files.readString(file.toPath());
```

Both the `readAllLines` and `readString` methods throw IOExceptions. This is a checked exception type so you need to throw or catch them (as in the initial example).
{:.error}

These methods are **not** performance optimised, so if you need to read a very large file in a performance intensive setting (e.g. developing an industry strength library) these aren’t the way to go. However, in most cases both are fine.

