---
title: COMP116 - Quaternions and 3D Graphics
tags: COMP116 Lectures
---
How to we extend the complex plane to 3D? We do this by considering vector algebra with four components.

## Quaternion Structure
Complex numbers can be written as 2-vectors $\langle x,y\rangle$.

Quaternions use points in $\Bbb R^4$ (all values are real) of the form:

$$q=(w,x,y,z)$$

Matching $z=x+iy$ we now have:

$$q=w+ix+jy+kz$$

Where:
$$
i^2=j^2=k^2=-1
$$

And:

$$
\begin{aligned}
jk&=-kj=i\\
ki&=-ik=j\\
ij&=-ji=k
\end{aligned}
$$

## Notation

* $\Bbb H$ - The set of all quaternions.

	The notation $\Bbb H$ is in honour of William Hamilton$
	{:.info}
* $q\in\Bbb H$ - An arbitrary quaternion.
* The forms $q=w+ix+jy+kz$ and $q[\alpha,\vec v]$ are both used.
	*	In the second of these $w\equiv \alpha \in \Bbb R;$ $\vec v=\langle x,y,.z\rangle\in\Bbb R^3$
	
		The vector $\vec v$ is a 3-vector in $\Bbb R$.
		{:.info}

## Operations

* Addition
	* Add the corresponding components.
* Scalar Multiplication by $\alpha\in\Bbb R$
	* Multiply individual components by $\alpha$.
* Conjugate
	* If $q=(w,x,y,z)$, $\bar q=(w,-x,-y,-z)$
	* If $q=[\alpha,\vec v]$, $\bar q=[\alpha,-\vec v]$
* Modulus
	* $\vert\vert(w,x,y,z)\vert\vert=\sqrt{w^2+x^2+y^2+z^2}$
	* Equivalently $\vert\vert[\alpha,\vec v]\vert\vert=\sqrt{\alpha^2+\vert\vert\vec v\vert\vert^2}$
	* If $\vert\vert q\vert\vert=1$, $q$ is called a **unit quaternion**.
* Division
	* $q^{-1}=\frac{\bar q}{\vert\vert q\vert\vert^2}$
	
### Multiplication
For two arbitrary quaternions $s,t\in\Bbb H$ how do we form their product?

Expanding brackets is complicated and tedious. Consider this form, for $s=[\alpha,\vec u]$ and $t=[\beta,\vec v]$, $s\times t=$:

$$[\alpha\beta-\vec u\cdot\vec v,\alpha\vec v+\beta\vec u+\vec u\times\vec v]$$

Pay attention to the dot product and the cross product.
{:.info}

Quaternion product is **not commutative** ($s\cdot t\neq t\cdot s$)
{:.error}

## 3D Graphics
Matrix-vector products don't work well for rotation in 3D. Additionally they are computationally expensive.

### Gimbal Lock
This phenomenon occurs when using matrix-vectors for 3D graphics. This is because you may ask for undefined values of trig functions. This will occur in errors.

Quaternions do not suffer from these errors.

### Rotation with Quaternions
Suppose we are looking to rotate a point $(x,y,z)$ about some **axis of rotation** (an infinite line in 3D) $\vec v=\langle \alpha,\beta,\gamma\rangle$.

We wish to rotate through some angle $\theta\degree$.

1. Choose the quaternion $q_\theta=[\cos(\frac{\theta}{2}),\sin(\frac{\theta}{2})\vec v]$

	Since we are dealing with a line we can **always** choose $\vec v$ so that $q_\theta$ is a **unit quaternion**.
	{:.info}
1. The computation "rotate $\vec w=\langle x,y,z\rangle$ by $\theta\degree$ about $\vec v$" is just the quaternion product:

	$$q_\theta\cdot[0,\vec w]\cdot q_\theta^{-1}=q_\theta^{-1}\cdot[0,\vec w]\cdot q_\theta$$