---
title: COMP116 - Complex Valued Functions - 1 (Differential Calculus)
tags: COMP116 Lectures
---
The main issue with complex numbers is that they **cannot be ordered**.

These issues mainly effect the following class of functions:

$$f:\Bbb C \rightarrow \Bbb C$$

## Functions with Real Domain & Complex Range
The special case $f:\Bbb R\rightarrow \Bbb C$ is fairly straightforward since $f(x)$ is two rel valed functions:

$$f_{\text{Re}}:\Bbb R\rightarrow \Bbb R;f_{\text{Im}}:\Bbb R\rightarrow \Bbb R$$

So that:

$$f(x)=f_{\text{Re}}(x)+if_{\text{Im}}(x)$$

Therefore the first derivative is represented by the following:

$$f'(x)=f'_{\text{Re}}(x)+if'_{\text{Im}}(x)$$

Integration would give a similar equation:

$$\int^q_p f(x)dx=\int^q_p f_{\text{Re}}(x)dx+i\int^q_p f_{\text{Im}}(x)dx$$

## Functions with Complex Domain & Range
When $f:\Bbb C\rightarrow \Bbb C$ more care is needed.

Consider $f(z)$ where $z=p+iq$

We have real valued functions $u(p,q)$ and $v(p,q)$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
&f(z)=f(p+iq)\\
\equiv& f(p,q)=u(p,q)+iv(p,q)
\end{aligned}
$$

So we have a function of two real variables mapping to two real-valued functions of two real variables.
{:.info}

This suggest applying partial derivatives.

### Cauchy-Reimann Conditions
In order for $f'(z)$ to be sensibly defined bia partial derivatives we respect to $\text{Re}(z)$ and $\text{Im}(z)$ of $\text{Re}\left(f(z)\right)$ and $\text{Im}\left(f(z)\right)$ (the 2 variable functions $u(p,q)$ and $v(p,q)$ of the previous slide) there are some important preconditions that $u(p,q)$ and $v(p,q)$ have to satisfy.

There are called the Cauchy-Riemann conditions:

$$\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}=\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}$$

$$\frac{\partial u}{\partial q}=-\frac{\partial v}{\partial p}$$

These are conditions on functions.

These conditions say that it doesn't matter that there are many ways of approaching zero as they are all equivalent.
{:.info}

## Example
For $f(z)=z^2$ where $z=p+iq$. We have:

$$
\begin{aligned}
u(p,q)&=\text{Re}\left(f(z)\right)\\
&=\text{Re}\left((p+iq)^2\right)\\
&=p^2-q^2\\
v(p,q)&=\text{Im}\left(f(z)\right)\\
&=\text{Im}\left((p+iq)^2\right)\\
&=2pq
\end{aligned}
$$

Lets apply the first Cauchy-Reimann condition:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}&=2p\\
\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}&=2p
\end{aligned}
$$

These two are the same so we know the first condition is met.
{:.info}

And the second condition:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}&=-2q\\
\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}&=2q
\end{aligned}
$$

This condition is also satisfied.
{:.info}

Notice:

$$
\begin{aligned}
f'(z)&=2z\\
&=2p+2iq\\
&=\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}+i\frac{\partial v}{\partial p}\\
&=\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}-i\frac{\partial u}{\partial q}
\end{aligned}
$$

The Cauchy-Riemann conditions establish the validity of this rule.
{:.info}

### Additional Example Notes
The conjugate function does not satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann conditions. This means that it is not able to be differentiated.

Consider $f(z)=\frac{1}{z}$. From [the complex division operation]({{site.baseurl}}/comp116/lectures/2021/03/01/1.html#division-zudiv-v) we must rewrite this like so:

$$\frac{1}{z}=\frac{\bar z}{\vert z \vert^2}=\frac{\bar z}{\left(\text{Re}(z)\right)^2+\left(\text{Im}(z)\right)^2}$$

We can let $z=p+iq$

$$f(p+iq)=\frac{p-iq}{p^2+q^2}=u(p,q)-iv(p,q)$$

Here:

$$
\begin{aligned}
u(p,q)&=\frac{p}{p^2+q^2}\\
v(p,q)&=\frac{-q}{p^2+q^2}
\end{aligned}
$$

These two functions satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann conditions.
{:.info}