---
title: COMP105
tags: COMP105
---
# Lecture 12-2
## Function Types
Functions also have types in the type system. The type of a function is based on the values it takes as an argument and returns.

### Single Argument Functions
For a one argument function, the type is written as:

```haskell
[input type] -> [output type]
```

### Multi-Argument Functions
For a function with more than one argument, the type uses multiple `->`:

```haskell
[input type] -> [input type] -> [output type]
```

This makes sense as a Haskell function can only return a single type.

### Partial Application
In most functional languages, function can be **partially applied**. This means that you call a function with fewer arguments than are required.

```haskell
plus a b = a + b

plus2 = plus 2

> plus2 10
> 12

> plus2 1
> 3
```

As you can see **currying** a function is the same as applying a permanent input to a function and leaving the other one open. This means that:

```haskell
f = plus 1
```

is the same as:

```haskell
f x = plus 1 x
```

In partial application:

* We fix some of the arguments.
* We leave other arguments unfixed.

This creates a new function that only has the unfixed arguments.

#### Partial Application Types
As the function made in a partial application just a function that takes the unfixed arguments, the inputs are the types of the unfixed arguments. For the functions:

```haskell
func a b c = a + b + c

func2 = func 23
```

The type would be `func2 :: Int -> Int -> Int`, as the unused arguments are carried over.

#### Argument Order
The order of the partial application must follow the same order as the original function. This means that is makes more sense to use it on prefix functions:

```haskell
f = (:) 1
```

This would allow you to cons `1` onto another list.

#### Partially Applying Infix Operators
To partially apply an infix operator see the following example:

```haskell
f = (/2)
```

This will take a single input and divide it by two. As you can see the infix operator should be put in brackets.

### Bracketing for Function Types
Function application should be thought of multiple partial applications.

```haskell
((multThree x y z = x) * y) * z
```

This means that the function type brackets to the right:

```haskell
Int -> Int -> Int -> Int
```

is the same as:

```haskell
Int -> (Int -> (Int -> Int))
```

This is a first look at a *higher order function*. This means that we are writing one argument functions that return other functions.

### Multiple Arguments v.s. Tuples
Previously we've seen that you can write function in two ways:

* Using usual "spaces" syntax.
* Using tuples.

```haskell 
multThree x y z = x * y * z
multThree' (x, y, z) = x * y * z
```

These both do the same thing, but the second version cannot be partially applied. This means is is best to avoid tuples unless they are necessary.

## Exercises
1. `isA :: Char -> Bool`
1. `isADouble :: Char -> Char -> (Bool, Bool)`
1. `exclaim :: [Char] -> [Char]`