---
title: COMP201 - Requirements Engineering Process
tags: COMP201 Lectures
---
This lecture is very similar to [COMP107 - Requirement Elicitation]({{site.baseurl}}/comp107/lectures/2020/10/24/1.html).

The enginerring process goes as follows:

1. Requirement elicitation - What services does the end-user require?
1. Requirements analysis - How to we classify, prioritise and negotiate requirements?
1. Requirements validation - Does the proposed system do what the users require?
1. Requirements management - How do we manage the changes to the requirements document?

## Feasibility Study
This decides whether the proposed system is worthwhile. It checks if:

* The system contributes to organisational objectives.
* The system can be engineered using current technology and within budget.
* The system can be integrated with other systems that are used.
* There is a simpler way of doing this.
	* Buy in software and customise.
	
## Elicitation & Analysis
This involves the technical staff working with customers to find out the **application domain**, the **services that the system should provide** and the **system's operation constraints**.

This will involve stakeholders such as:

* End-users
* Managers
* Maintenance Engineers
* Domain Experts
* Trade Unions

These different stake holders will often have conflicting and non-specific requirements.
{:.warning}

## Requirements Discovery
This is the process of **gathering information** about the proposed and existing systems. These requirements often come from:

* Similar systems.
* Existing systems to be improved.
* Competitor's systems.

You can also discover requirements from prototypes.
{:.info}

## Viewpoint Identification
**Viewpoints** are a way of structuring the requirements to represent the perspectives of different stakeholders. 

Stakeholders may be classified under different viewpoints.
{:.info}

## Interviewing
This involves the requirement elicitation team putting questions to stakeholders about the system. You can ask questions in the following ways:

* Closed interviews - A predefined set of questions are answered.
* Open interviews - There is no pre-defined agenda and a range of issues are explored with stakeholders.

## Ethnography
This is the practice of observing workers in order to find out how they complete their work.

People don't have to explain what they are doing.

### Focused Ethnography
This is a combination of **ethnography and prototyping**. This may answer questions that may never have been asked.

There is an issue that you are studying existing practices which may no longer be relevant.