---
title: Software Cost Estimation
tags: COMP201 Lectures
---
## Cost Components
* Hardware and Software Costs
* Travel and Training Costs
* Effort Costs (The dominant factor in most projects)
	* Salaries of engineers involved in the project.
	* social and insurance costs.
* Effort costs must take overheads into account:
	* Costs of building, heating, lighting.
	* Costs of networking and communications.
	* Costs of shared facilities (library, staff restaurant).
	
## Pricing Factors
The **cost** is how much the company spends on making the software product. The **price** is what the customer pays.

* Market Opportunity - A low price may be quoted when moving into a new segment. This may bring the opportunity of more profit later.
* Cost Estimate Uncertainty - The price may be increased if the cost is unknown.
* Contractual Terms - If the source code is withheld then the price could be less.
* Requirements Volatility - If the requirements are likely to be changed an organisation may lower its price to win the contract. High prices may then be charged for changes to the requirements.
* Financial Health - Developers in financial difficult may lower their price to gain a contract. It is better to make a small profit than go out of business.

## Programmer Productivity
These are ways of measuring how much work a particular programmer has completed:

* Size-Related Measures:
	* Lines of code delivered:
		* This isn't the best measure, just write loads of code that does nothing.
	* Object code instructions.
* Function-Related Measures:
	* Based on an estimate of the functionality of the delivered software.
	* Function-points - A weight is associated with each point:
		* External inputs and outputs.
		* User interactions.
		* External interfaces.
		* Files used by the system.
	* Object Points:
		* Number of screens.
		* Number of reports.
		* Number of modules developed.
		
	Multiply each raw count by the weight and sum the results.
		{:.info}

### Factors Affecting Productivity

* Application Domain Experience
* Development Process Quality
* Project Size
	* Due to increased communication.
* Technology Support
* Working Environment

## Estimation Techniques
You should ideally use multiple of the following to find the cost of the system:

* If they don't return approximately the same result, there is insufficient information available.
* Pricing to win is sometimes the only applicable method.
 
### Algorithmic Code Modelling
This is a **formulaic approach** based on historical cost information. This is generally based on the **size of the software**.

$$
\text{Effort}=A\times\text{Size}^B\times M
$$

Where:

* $A$ - Organisation-dependant constant.
* $B$ - Reflects the disproportionate effort for large projects.
* $M$ - A multiplier reflecting product, process and people attributes.

### Expert Judgement
One or more experts in both software development and the application domain use their experience to predict software costs. The process iterates until some consensus is reached.

* **Advantages**:
	* Relatively cheap estimation method.
	* Can be accurate if experts have direct experience of similar systems.
* **Disadvantages**:
	* Very inaccurate if there are no experts.

### Estimation by Analogy
The cost of a project is computed by comparing the project to a **similar project** in the same application domain.

* **Advantages**:
	* Accurate if project data is available.
* **Disadvantages**:
	* Impossible if no comparable project has been tackled.
	* Needs a systematically maintained cost database.
	
### Parkinson's Law
The project costs whatever resources are available:

> Work expands to fill the time available. The cost is determined by available resources rather than by objective statements.

* **Advantages**:
	* No overspend.
* **Disadvantages**:
	* System is usually unfinished.
	
#### Parkinson's Law Example
The project should be delivered in **12 months** and there are **5 people** therefore:

$$
\text{Effort}=60p/m
$$

### Pricing to Win
The project costs whatever the customer has to spend.

* **Advantages**:
	* You get the contract.
* **Disadvantages**:
	* The probability that the customer gets the system they **want** is small.
	* Costs do not accurately reflect the work required.
	
### Top-Down or Bottom-Up Estimation
Any of the previous approaches can be completed as top-down or bottom-up.

* **Top-Down** - Start at the system level and assess the overall system functionality and how this is deliver through sub-systems.
* **Bottom-Up** - Start at the component level and estimate the effort required for each component. Add these effort to reach a final estimate.

## Estimation Accuracy
The size of a software system can only be know **accurately** when it is **finished**:

* As the development process progresses the size estimate becomes more accurate.