---
title: Software Testing
tags: COMP201 Lectures
---

## Test Plan Template

| Name of Case | Description | Input Data | Action | Expected Output | Actual Output | Pass |
| :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| LoginOKPass | Tests login with a good username and password. | Username=test1<br>Password=pass1 | Click login. | OK | Login OK | True |
| | | | | | | |

## Black-Box Testing
This is a method of testing where we blindly test inputs and validate the outputs.

There are additional examples of test cases [in the slides](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46117/files/6013927?module_item_id=1189968).
{:.info}

### Equivalence Partitioning
Often many inputs produce similar outputs (correct login produces a login event):

* We can then group the related inputs into an **equivalence partition**.

Testing data at the **edge** of the equivalence partition is more likely to produce errors.
{:.info}

## White-Box Testing (Structural Testing)
This form of testing uses knowledge of the program to identify additional test cases:

* The aim is to exercise all program statements (not all path combinations).

There are additional examples of test cases [in the slides](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46117/files/6013927?module_item_id=1189968).
{:.info}

### Cyclomatic Complexity
We can represent the branches in the code as a graph where:

* Nodes - Branches
* Edges - Program Flow

The cyclomatic complexity of a **program graph** is:

$$
e -n+2
$$

* $e$ - The number of edges.
* $n$ - The number of nodes.

This represents the **number of tests** to test all control statements.

There is an example of calculating cyclomatic complexity [the the slides](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46117/files/6013928?module_item_id=1189970).
{:.info}

## Integration Testing
This is the testing of **complete systems**, or **sub-systems**, composed of integrated components:

* Should be black-box testing with tests derived from the specification.
* We can use **incremental integration** to find which component interactions cause the issues.

### Incremental Integration Testing
This method uses **regression testing**:

* For each additional component we add, we still complete all of the tests that we have done before. 

### Top-Down Testing
This is where we start with a high-level system and integration from the top-down, **replacing individual components** by stubs where appropriate.

This method allows for the following:

* Architectural Validation - This method is better at discovering errors in the system architecture.
* System Demonstration - Top-Down integration testing allows a limited demonstration at an early stage in the development.

### Bottom-Up Testing
This is where we integrate individual components in levels until the complete system is created.

This testing is best suited for:

* **Object Oriented Systems** - There is a neat decomposition into classes and methods.
* **Real Time Systems** - Allows use to identify slow code quickly.
* **Systems with Strict Performance Requirements** - Allows us to measure the performance of individual methods early in the testing process.

### Interface Testing
This takes place when modules, or sub-systems, are integrates to create larger systems.

The objective is to detect faults due to **interface errors** or invalid assumptions about interfaces.

#### Interface Types

* **Parameter Interfaces** - Data is passed from one procedure to another.
* **Shared Memory Interfaces** - A block of memory is shared between procedures.
* **Procedural Interfaces** - Sub-system encapsulates a set of procedures to be called by other sub-systems.
* **Message Passing Interfaces** - Sub-system request services from other sub-systems.

#### Interface Errors

* **Interface Misuse** - A calling component calls another component and makes an error in its use of its interface.
* **Interface Misunderstanding** - A calling component embeds assumptions about the behaviour of the called component which are incorrect.
* **Timing Errors** - The called and the calling component operate at different speed and out-of-date information is accessed.

There is information on how to test these **types of interfaces, stress testing, object-oriented testing, object class testing** and **testing levels** [in the slides](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46117/files/6013928?module_item_id=1189970).
{:.info}

There is also an example of testing a weather station object interface.
{:.info}

### Cluster Testing
Cluster testing is concerned with integrating and testing clusters of cooperating objects. We can use the following testing methods on these systems:

* **Use-Case or Scenario Testing**:
	* Testing is based on user interactions with the system.
	* Has the advantage that it tests system features as experienced by users.
	* **Scenario testing** should be supplemented with **interaction diagrams**.

	There is an example of scenario testing with a weather station [in the slides](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/46117/files/6013928?module_item_id=1189970)
	{:.info}
* **Thread Testing**:
	* Tests the systems response to events as processing thread through the system.
* **Object Integration Testing**:
	* Tests sequences of object interaction that stop when an object operation does not call on services from another object.