---
title: COMP201 - Security Requirements
tags: COMP201 Lectures
---
Security is required in computer systems as they often handle **money** and **customer data**. Having these exposed could have costly repercussions to a company. 

You can break down the **security requirements** of a system into the following issues:

* Confidentiality
* Integrity
* Authentication & Authorisation
* Non-repudiation

**Availability** can also be a requirement of secure systems.
{:.info}

## Confidentiality
There are usually two main options:

* Encryption (Hard security)
* Permissions (Soft security)

Data must be kept secure in the following circumstances:

* In storage (final or intermediary).
* On the wire or wireless link.
* For as long as reasonably possible.
	* Should depend on the circumstances.
	
## Integrity
Messages or data must not be modifiable without **knowledge of the change**. There are several approaches:

* CRC checking (not good for security).
* Hash value of data (can be recomputed).
* Hash value over data + secret value.
	* Key must be distributed to the recipient.
* Hash value encrypted using asymmetric cipher.
	* Easier to manage keys.
	
## Authentication & Authorisation

* Authentication - Identifying a user.
* Authorisation - Permissions on the system.

You can use usernames, passwords, hardware keys & bio-metrics to confirm **authentication**. 

This if often the first point of attack.
{:.info}

## Non-Repudiation
This is when you are sending messages but you want to prove at a later date and time, what the message was and when it was sent.

This often requires:

* A trusted broker.
	* Messages are sent to a third party server and then forwarded to the recipient.
* Funding is escrow.
	* Allows money to be stored until the transaction is complete.

This is built upon:

* Authentication
* Integrity
* Recording a time stamping.
	* Via a trusted third party server.
* Broker style services.

## Availability
We specify this in the "9s" terminology:

| Up-time | Max Downtime |
| :-- | :-- |
| 99.9999% | 31.5s per year |
| 99.999% | 5m35s per year |
| 99.99% | 52m33s per year |

Most high availability systems aim for five 9s.
{:.info}

### Precise Availability
Having a system with a certain number of nines needs to have precise specifications in order to be useful. We should specify:

* Worst case scenarios.
	* How long the system can be down at a time in the worst case.
* Worst case delay as well as down time.
* Ho the system can degrade gracefully.
	* Notice of downtime for planned maintenance.
	
## Logs & Alerts
Security is dependent on the knowledge of activity. We could have the following types of log:

* Standard Log - Records all logins/logouts, database access requests.
* Failed Login Log - Records all failed logins.
* Unusual Activity Log - High volume of transations on account.
* Alert Log - Failed logins for top level clearance users.

Alerts can be used to track unusual activity and alert operators, suspend accounts and more.

## Bell La-Padula Model
All items are given a security clearance:

1. Unclassified
1. Sensitive
1. Secret
1. Top-Secret

There are also the following restrictions:

* No Read-Up - A subject cannot read a document above their clearance level.
* No Write-Down - A document cannot be copied/included in another document with lower security clearance.
* Trusted Subjects:
	* Can write documents down.
	* Must be shown trustworthy with regard to the security policy.
	
## Specifying Security
Ideally security policies should be kept open to allow for upgrading of algorithms and protocols.

The security policy could also include:

* Shredding Documents
* Secure Disposal
* Password Reset Protocols
* Security Training
* Security Audits

You should also bear in mind standards compliance:

* Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard - For card details

## Requirements Checking

* Validity - Does the system provide the function which best support the customer's needs?
* Consistency - Are the any requirement conflicts?
* Completeness - Are all functions required by the customer?
* Realism - Can the requirements be implemented given available budget and technology?
* Verifiability - Can the requirements be tested.?

### Scenarios
These are test cases running against a given situation.

They are useful as they show the developer by example what will happen given certain conditions.

### Agile Requirements - Cucumber
This is a software tool used to help write requirement which are linked **directly** to tests.

Cucumber uses a language called gherkin to describe features:

```
Feature: Login
	In order To probe who I am
	As a customer
	I want to be able to login to the system
Scenario: Login with test account1
	Given I have  entered a username of account1
	And I have entered a password of pass1234
	When I click login
	Then the result should be login successful
```

* The `Feature:` is not parted but describes a feature to a developer.
* The `Scenario:` is an example by also is linked to test code.

This is linked to the following test code:

```java
public class LoginSteps {
@Given("^I have entered a username of account(\\d+)$")
public void i_have_entered_a_username_of_account(int arg1) throws Throwable {
	throw new PendingException();
}

@Given("^I have entered a password of pass(\\d+)$")
public void i_have_entered_a_password_of_pass(int arg1) throws Throwable {
throw new PendingException();
}

@When("^I click login$")
public void i_click_login() throws Throwable {
throw new PendingException();
}

@Then("^The result should be login succesful$")
public void the_result_should_be_login_succesful() throws Throwable {
throw new PendingException();
}
}
```

Cucumber has the following advantages:

* Gives simple and clear notation to write a specification.
* Analyst and test teams can learn Gherkin and develop feature files.
* Step files are produced by the development team.
* Test data can be change later without changing the test code.