---
title: Project Management
tags: COMP201 Lectures
---
This is the process of organising, planning and scheduling software projects.

We need to make sure that the product is delivered **on time** and each component is delivered **on schedule**.

## Management Activities

* Proposal Writing
* Project Planning and Scheduling
* Project Costing
* Project Monitoring and Reviews
* Personnel Selection and Evaluation
* Report Writing and Presentations
* Project Staffing & Training

### Project Planning
The following types of project plan exist:

* **Quality Plan** - Describes the quality procedures and standards that will be used in a project.
* **Validation Plan** - Describes the approach, resources and schedule used for system validation.
* **Configuration Management Plan** - Describes the configuration management procedures and structured to be used.
* **Maintenance Plan** - Predicts the maintenance requirement for the system, maintenance costs and effort required
* **Staff Development Plan** - Describes how the skills and experience of the project team members will be developed.

The project plan should have the following structure:

1. Introduction
1. Project Organisation
1. Risk Analysis
1. Hardware and Software Resource Requirements
1. Work Breakdown
1. Project Schedule
1. Monitoring and Reporting Mechanisms

#### Activity Organisation
Activities in a project should be organised to produce **tangible outputs** for management to judge progress:

* **Milestones** -  Are the end-pont of a process activity.
* **Deliverable** - Are project results delivered to customers.

We can see this in the requirements engineering process:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
subgraph Activities
fs[Feasibility Study] --> ra[Requirements Analysis] --> pd[Prototype Development] --> ds[Design Study] --> rs[Requirements Specification]
end
subgraph Milestones
fs --> fr[Feasibility Report]
ra --> rd[Requirements Definition]
pd --> er[Evaluation Report]
ds --> ad[Architectural Design]
rs --> rs2[Requirements Specification]
end
```

### Project Scheduling
This is the process of splitting **projects** into **tasks** and estimating the time and resources required to complete each task. We should:

* Organise tasks **concurrently**.
* Minimise **task dependencies** to avoid delays.

We could face the following issues:

* **Estimating** the **difficulty** of problems is hard.
* Productivity is **not proportional** to the number of people.
* Adding people **late** can delay a project due to **communication overheads**.

Tasks should not be too small, about a **week** in length.
{:.info}

#### Task Durations & Dependencies

| Task | Duration/Days | Dependencies |
| :-- | --: | :-- |
| T1 | 8 | |
| T2 | 15 | |
| T3 | 15 | T1 (M1) |
| T4 | 10 | |
| T5 | 10 | T2, T4 (M2) |
| T6 | 5 | T1, T2 (M3) |
| T7 | 20 | T1 (M1) |
| T8 | 25 | T4 (M5) |
| T9 | 15 | T3, T6 (M4) |
| T10 | 15 | T5, T7 (M7) |
| T11 | 7 | T9 (M6) |
| T12 | 10 | T11 (M8) |

#### Activity Network

```mermaid
graph LR
Start --- T1 & T2 & T4
T1 --- M1 & M3
T2 --- M3 & M2
T4 --- M2 & M5
M1 --- T3 & T7
M3 --- T6
M2 --- T5
M5 --- T8
T3 --- M4
T6 --- M4
T7 --- M7
T5 --- M7
T8 --- Finish
M4 --- T9
M7 --- T10
T9 --- M6
T10 --- Finish
M6 --- T11
T11 --- M8
M8 --- T12
T12 --- Finish
Start([Start<br>4/7/99])
T1[T1<br>8 days]
T2[T2<br>15 days]
T3[T3<br>15 days]
T4[T4<br>10 days]
T5[T5<br>10 days]
T6[T6<br>5 days]
T7[T7<br>20 days]
T8[T8<br>25 days]
T9[T9<br>15 days]
T10[T10<br>15 days]
T11[T11<br>7 days]
T12[T12<br>10 days]
M1([M1<br>14/7/99])
M2([M2<br>25/7/99])
M3([M3<br>25/7/99])
M4([M4<br>4/8/99])
M5([M5<br>18/7/99])
M6([M6<br>25/8/99])
M7([M7<br>11/8/99])
M8([M8<br>5/9/99])
Finish([Finish<br>19/9/99])
```

* **Minimal time** - Length of the longest (**critical**) path which is 55 days.

#### Activity Timeline (Gantt Chart)

```mermaid
gantt
dateFormat DD/MM/YYYY
Start:milestone, Start, 04/07/1999, 0d
T1:T1, after Start, 8d
T2:T2, after Start, 15d
T4:T4, after Start, 10d
M1:milestone, M1, after T1, 0d
T3:T3, after M1, 15d
T7:T7, after M1, 20d
M5:milestone, M5, after T4, 0d
T8:T8, after M5, 25d
M2:milestone, M2, after T2, 0d
M3:milestone, M3, after T2, 0d
T5:T5, after M2, 10d
T6:T6, after M3, 5d
M4:milestone, M4, after T3, 0d
T9:T9, after M4, 15d
M7:milestone, M7, after T7, 0d
T10:T10, after M7, 15d
M6:milestone, M6, after T9, 0d
T11:T11, after M6, 7d
M8:milestone, M8, after T11, 0d
T12:T12, after M8, 10d
Finish:milestone, after T12, 0d
```

You can extend the bars to show lag.
{:.info}

#### Staff Allocation (Gantt Chart)

```mermaid
gantt
dateFormat DD/MM/YYYY
section Fred
Start:milestone, Start, 04/07/1999, 0d
T4:T4, after Start, 10d
M5:milestone, M5, after T4, 0d
T8:T8, after M5, 25d
T11:T11, after M6, 7d
M8:milestone, M8, after T11, 0d
T12:T12, after M8, 10d
Finish:milestone, after T12, 0d

section Jane
T1:T1, after Start, 8d
M1:milestone, M1, after T1, 0d
T3:T3, after M1, 15d
M4:milestone, M4, after T3, 0d
T9:T9, after M4, 15d
M6:milestone, M6, after T9, 0d

section Anne
T2:T2, after Start, 15d
M2:milestone, M2, after T2, 0d
M3:milestone, M3, after T2, 0d
T6:T6, after M3, 5d
T10:T10, after M7, 15d

section Jim
T7:T7, after M1, 20d
M7:milestone, M7, after T7, 0d

section Mary
T5:T5, after M2, 10d
```

The milestones weren't shown on the slide in this chart. I was too lazy to take them out.
{:.warning}

#### Pert Charts
These show the following:

* **Early Start** - Earliest time a task can start.
* **Early End** - The earliest time the task can end.
* **Late Start** - The latest time the task can start without delaying the deadline.
* **Late End** - The latest time the project can end without delaying the deadline.
* **Slack** - The amount a task can be delayed without delaying the project.
	* Calculated from *Late Start* - *Early Start*.
	* Slack = 0 means that the task is **critical**.
	
They are shown as a set of linked tables with the following format:

| Duration: 6 | Task 1 |
| :-: | :-: |
| Start | End |
| Early: 0 | Early: 6 |
| Late: 8 | Late: 14 |

You might find better information on this type of chart by searching for **activity networks**. Pert charts seem to be a different thing.
{:.info}

## Risk Management
This is drawing plans to minimise the effect of risks on the project.

Risks can be in the following categories:

* **Project Risks** - Affect the **schedule** or **resources**.
* **Product Risks** - Affect the **quality** or **performance** of the software being developed.
* **Business Risks** - Affect the organisation developing or procuring the software.

### Risk Management Process

1. **Risk Identification** - Identify project, product and business risks.
1. **Risk Analysis** - Assess the likelihood and consequences of these risks.
1. **Risk Planning** - Draw up plans to avoid or minimise the effects of the risk.
1. **Risk Monitoring** - Monitor the risks throughout the project.

### Risk Identification
You could identify risks in the following categories:

* **Technology** - The database used in the system cannot process as
many transactions per second as expected.
Software components which should be reused contain
defects which limit their functionality.
* **People** - It is impossible to recruit staff with the skills required.
Key staff are ill and unavailable at critical times.
Required training for staff is not available.
* **Organisational** - The organisation is restructured so that different
management are responsible for the project.
Organisational financial problems force reductions in the
project budget.
* **Tools** - The code generated by CASE tools is inefficient.
CASE tools cannot be integrated.
* **Requirements** - Changes to requirements which require major design
rework are proposed.
Customers fail to understand the impact of requirements
changes.
* **Estimation** - The time required to develop the software is
underestimated.
The rate of defect repair is underestimated.
The size of the software is underestimated.

### Risk Analysis
We need to estimate the following:

* **Probability**:
	* Very Low
	* Low
	* Moderate
	* High
	* Very High
* **Risk Effects**:
	* Catastrophic
	* Serious
	* Tolerable
	* Insignificant

We can then put the analysis in the following table:

| Risk | Probability | Effects |
| :-- | :-- | :-- |
| Organisational financial problems force reductions in the project budget. | Low | Catastrophic |
| | | |

### Risk Planning
We can use the following strategies to minimise risk:

* **Avoidance Strategies** - The probability that the risk will arise is reduced.
* **Minimisation Strategies** - The impact of the risk on the project or product will be reduced
* **Contingency Plans** - If the risk arises, contingency plans are plans to deal with that risk.

### Risk Monitoring
We can draw up a table of **risk factors** and indicators so that we can spot issues early:

| Risk Type | Potential Indicators |
| :-- | :-- |
| People | Poor staff morale, poor relationships amongst team member, job availability |
| | |