---
title: Software Requirements
tags: COMP201 Lectures
---
## User Requirements
These are statements in natural language plus diagrams of services the system provides and its operational constraints.

This is written for **customers**.

## System Requirements
A structured document setting out detailed descriptions of system services.

This can be used as a written contract between **client** and **contractor**.

## Software Specification
A detailed software description which can serve as a basis for a design or implementation.

This is written for the **developers**.

### Example
#### User requirement

* We need to be able to spell check documents

#### System requirement

* The system needs to be able to spell check documents and provide auto-correct facilities. Their will be support for the following languages, English, French and German will have plug in support for other languages.

#### Software specification

* `CheckResult` `spellCheck(String word, Dictionary dictionary)`
	* Word is defined in UNICODE formatted string
	* The Dictionary structure is defined in S.1.2
	* The `CheckResult` is defined in S.1.3 and contains a flag if the word has been found or not, plus a Vector object containing a list of possible other word suggestions depending if the word has been found or not
	* `spellCheck` will ideally use Hashing tables to improve code efficiency
	* ……
	
## Types of Requirements
**Functional requirements** - Statements of services the system should provide, how the system should react to particular inputs and how the system should behave in particular situations.

**Non-functional requirements** - Constraints of the services or functions offered by the system such as timing constraints and standards to be used:

These are usually defined on the system as a whole.
{:.info}

**Domain Requirements** - Come from the application domain of the system and reflect characteristics of that domain.

**Product Requirements** - Specify how the product must behave.

**Organisational Requirements** - A consequence of organisational policies and procedures. 

**External Requirements** - Arise from factors external to the system such as legislation and interoperability requirements.

### Completeness & Consistency
Requirements should be both **complete** and **consistent**:

* **Complete** - Should include descriptions of all facilities required.
* **Consistent** - There should be no conflicts in the descriptions of the system facilities.

### Goals vs Requirements
A goal is a general intention of the user such as ease of use.

Goals are helpful to developers as they convey the intentions of the system users.

## Requirement Measures
**Verifiable non-functional requirements** are a pass/fail test for a particular goal.

### Example

| Property | Measure |
| :-- | :-- |
| Speeed | Processed transactions/second, User/event response time; screen refresh time.