---
title: Principles of Good Modular Design (Coupling, Cohesion & Encapsulation)
tags: COMP201 Lectures
---
Good systems have the following properties:

* Useful and Usable
* Reliable (Low Coupling)
* Flexible (Low Coupling, High Cohesion)
	* Easy to modify for different purposes and in event of change.
* Affordable (Software Reuse)
* Available (Decreased development time through reuse.)

## Module Interfaces
The interface of a module is how you interact with the module.

Assumptions about interfaces should be documented in the interface:

* This means that changes to the internal of a module shouldn't change how the interface behaves.

## Principles of Good Design
### Linguistic Modular Units
This is the idea that modules should correspond to linguistic units (such as classes) in the language used.

### Few Interfaces
The overall number of communication channels between modules should be as small as possible. 

In a system with $n$ modules there may be a minimum of $n-1$ and maximum of $\frac{n(n-1)}2$ links.
{:.info}

#### Facade Structure 
You can also implement a **public interface** for a set of modules.

This keeps interfaces down as you can only interact with a package via it's public interface.

#### Coupling
This is a measure of the strength of the inter-connection between system component.

Ideally components should exchange as little data as possible between themselves.

* **Loose Coupling** - Component changes are unlikely to affect other components.
	
	Loose coupling can be achieved by state decentralisation and component communication via parameters, or message passing.
	{:.info}
* **Tight Coupling** - Components have shared variables and lots of interaction.
	
	This is only acceptable when using a shared database.
	{:.warning}

##### Coupling & Inheritance
Object-oriented systems are loosely coupled because there is no shared state and object communicate using message passing. 

* However, an object class is coupled to its super-classes.
	
	Changes made to the attributes or operations in a super-class propagate to all sub-classes.

### Explicit Interfaces
If two modules **must** communicate, they should do it so that we can see it.

This should be obvious from the documentation of the modules involved.
{:.info}

If we change a module, we need to see if any other modules may be affected by the change. A **traceability matrix** can be used for this.

### Information Hiding (Encapsulation)
All information about a module (and partially how the module doesn't what it does) should be private to the module unless it is specifically declared otherwise.

Therefore, each modules should have an **interface**, which is how the world see it. Anything beyond the interface should be hidden.

The default Java rule is to **make everything private**.
{:.info}

## Cohesion
This is a measure of how well a component fits together:

* A component should implement a single logical entity or function.

### Levels of Cohesion

Weak: 

* **Coincidental Cohesion** - Parts of a component are simply bundled together.
* **Logical Association** - Components which perform similar functions are grouped.
* **Temporal Cohesion** - Components which are activated at the same time are grouped.

Medium:

* **Communicational Cohesion** - All the elements of a component operation on the same input or produce the same output.
* **Sequential Cohesion** - The output for one part of a component is the input to another part.

Strong:

* **Functional Cohesion** - Each part of a component is necessary for the execution of a single function.
* **Object Cohesion** - Each operation provides which allows object attributes to be modified or inspected.

Ideally you want your **cohesion** to be as strong as possible with the weakest possible **coupling**.
{:.info}

Inheriting attributes from super-classes weakens cohesion as you have to examine the super-class as well as each component.
{:.warning}

### Cohesion vs. Encapsulation

* **Cohesion** - A measure of abstraction that means developers do not need to concern themselves with the internal working of a module.
* **Encapsulation** - Means that developers are unable to use hidden information within a modules, ensuring that subtle errors cannot be introduced when using connected modules.

## Pluggable Modules
If a module has **high cohesion**, **low coupling** and a **well defined interface** then it may be feasible to reuse that module in other systems.

You should make architectural decisions early as using architecture specific features can make code less reusable.
{:.warning} 