---
title: COMP105
tags: COMP105
---
# Lecture 4-2
## Lists
A list contains any number of items that all have the same type.

```
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
```

Lists are built with `[]` as opposed to tuples which are built with`()`.

* A list can have any number of elements including 0.

	```
	[]
	[1]
	[1, 2]
	```
* In Haskell lists are linked lists:
	* This means that random access is expensive.
	* Internally Haskell will walk the entire list to get to the last element.

### Strings

I Haskell strings are just a list of characters. This means that `['a', 'b', 'c']` is equivalent to `"abc"`. This has the result of allowing any string operator to  also work on lists.

### Operators

* You can join lists together with the `++` operator. Provided that they have the same type.
* The `!!` operator gets a specified element from the list.
	* Lists are zero indexed.
	
		```
		> [1 ,2 ,3] !! 0
		> 1
		```
* `head` takes the first element of a list.
* `tail` takes all but the first element of the list.
* `:` or the cons operator glues a new head onto an existing list.

	```
	> 1 : [2, 3, 4, 5]
	> [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
	```
	* Any list can be built by consing onto an empty list.
	
	```
	> 'a' : 'b' : 'c' : []
	> "abc"
	```
* `last` gives the last element of the list.
* `init` gives all elements but the last element.
* `length` returns the number of elements in the list

---
@figure
See slides for more functions.
@/

---

### Pattern Matching Example

```
triple_head (x:xs) = 3 * x
```

This will name the head of the list `x` and the tail `xs` as the input is `x` consed onto `xs`.

* It is common for the head to be called `x` or another value and for the tail to be called `xs` with an `s` on the tail.
* If the pattern cannot be matched, such as if the list is empty, then you will get an error.
* The wildcard pattern `_` won't assign a letter if you don't care about a value.
	
	```
	f (_:y:_) = 3 * y
	```
	
### Exercises

1. `thricesum list = sum list * 3`
1. `thirdelement _:_:x:_ = x`
1. `exclaim string = '!':string:'!'`