---
title: Intellectual Property
tags: COMP107 Lectures
---

This lecture was given in the form of a PDF. View [it here]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/comp107/lectures/2020-12-18.pdf) if you want to see it in full.
{:.info}

## Property
### Tangible Property
Tangible property originally referred to land but now refers to any physical object that a person can own.
### Relational Property
As property becomes less physical we should view it as a relation between the owner, the object and users.

* $X$ (as the property owner of $Y$) can control $Y$ relative to persons $A,B,C$ and so forth.
* If a person owns a certain object, then this person can control who has access to that object and how it is used.
	* They could exclude another person from using it and could grant another person unlimited access to it.
* Ownership claims involving **intellectual objects** (involving IP) are both similar to and different from ownership of tangible objects.

### Object Types
#### Tangible
* Tangible objects are exclusionary in nature.
	* If a person owns a specific physical object, then another person cannot, and vice versa.
* The sense of scarcity that applies to tangible objects, which often causes competition and rivalry, need not exist for intellectual objects.
	* For example, there are practical limitations to the number of physical objects that one can own.
	* There are also limitations (natural and political) to the amount of land that can be owned.

#### Intellectual
Intellectual objects represent creative works and inventions. They are manifestations or expressions of ideas.

* Intellectual objects, such as software programs, are non-exclusionary.
	* If a person makes a copy of a word-processing program that resides in another person’s computer, then both persons can possess copies of the same word-processing program.
* Intellectual objects can be easily reproduced.
	* Countless copies of a software program can be produced – each at a relatively low cost.
	
##### Ownership
* Legally, one cannot own an idea in the same sense that one can own a physical object.
* Governments do not grant ownership rights to individuals for ideas per-se.
* Legal protection is given only to the tangible expression of an idea that is creative or original.

### Theories of Property
* Labour Theory

	Argues that a property right is a "natural right" and that property rights can be justified by the labour or "toil" that one invests in cultivating land or in creating a work of art.
* Utilitarian Theory

	Argues that property rights are not natural rights but rather artificial rights created by the state. Property rights are granted to individuals and to corporations because they result in greater social utility overall.
* Personality Theory
	
	Argues that a property right is a "moral right" and that
property rights are justified not because of labour or
social utility but because creative works express the
personalities of the authors that create them.

### Schemes to Protect Intellectual Property
1. Copyright (for music, art, film, literary works and broadcasts).
1. Patent (for inventions and processes).
1. Trademark (for word, name phrase, or symbol that identify a product or service; a “brand identity”).
1. Design (for what a product looks like).
1. Trade Secret (for information used in the operation of a business or other enterprise, e.g. a formula, a chemical compound, a blueprint)

## Legislation Relevant in UK
* Copyright and Related Rights Regulations, 2003
* Copyright and Rights in Database Regulations 1997
* Intellectual Property Act 2014
* Data Protection Act 1998
* Computer Misuse Act 1990
* Electronic Commerce (EC Directive) Regulations 2002
* Others:
	* Freedom of Information Act, 2000
	* Disability Discrimination Act, 1995