---
title: COMP107 - How to Reference
tags: COMP107 Lectures
---
The purpose of referencing is to show how work extends the current state-of-the-art knowledge in the area, proof originality of work, give credit to other people's work, support and validate arguments made and demonstrate familiarity with work done in the area.

## Culture of Citing
For fiction there might be sources in your work, but these are never acknowledged, unless they serve a literary purpose.

In journalism there must be sources but these are rarely acknowledged. Exceptions may include quotations and for reports. These acknowledgements are not always in a format considered acceptable in academia.

## Dependency on Discipline
In academic writing all sources that make a contribution to you work must be acknowledged.

Styles can be different from discipline to discipline, for example in philosophy there is a huge amount of referencing. However, in mathematics concepts are often named after the person who made or discovered them or you may use a concept which has very specific wording but you won't reference in the same way as a philosophy paper.

## Rules of Thumb
* If you use words or ideas from any documents, even produced by yourself, then the source must be cited.
* If you gain words or ideas through conversation, written or spoken, the the source must be cited.
* If you use the exact words from any medium it must not only be cited but also indicated as a quotation. `""`
* If you reproduce any material then the source must be cited.

### No Citation is Required for:
* Your own experiences that have not been published before.
* You are writing about your own work that have not been published before.
* You are reusing your own materials.
* You are using common knowledge or generally accepted facts.
* In the context of student submission, if you use facts but not exact words form recommended textbooks.

## How to Refer to a Source 
Just by looking at the reference a knowledgeable reader must collect all information about the source. You should also have an idea about the type of a source from the structure.

---
@figure
Refer to the slides for the types of source.
@/
---

### URLs are not enough
This is as they don't give all the information about a source and may not be valid in the future. URLs are fine when given in addition to other information.

### Digital Object Identifiers
DOIs are a system of creating a perma-link to a digital reference online. They are preferable over URLS but still they should be given in addition to a conventional reference.

### Types of References
What information is required about  when the work can be obtained depends on it's type. For example here are references for a book[^book] and a journal paper[^paper].

* For how to refer to any individual type of media refer to the slides. There are also examples.

[^book]: Herman T. Tavani. 2010. Ethics and Technology: Controversies, Questions, and Strategeis for Ethical Computing (3^rd ed.). Wiley Publishing.
[^paper]: Herman T. Tavani. 2011. Can we Develop Aritficial Agents Capable of Making Good Moral Decisions?. Minds Mach. 21 ,3 (August 2011), 465-474. DOI=[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11023-011-9249-8](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11023-011-9249-8)