---
title: Semaphores & Signals
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
Semaphores are a **token** that you must acquire before entering a **critical region**. 

This could be a shared resource.
{:.info}

## Usage
A semaphore is a variable that is used as a flag to indicate when a resource is free or in use:

* `0` means a resource is in use.
* `1` means that the resource is free.

Semaphore can **only** be changed by two operations:

* `wait` and `signal`.
* Sometimes called:
	* `P` and `V`
	* `test` and `inc`
	* `up` and `down`

When a process **issues a wait** on the semaphore:

* If it is `0`, add process to the semaphore queue and suspend (block) process.
* If it is `1`, process continues execution.

When a process **issues a signal** on the semaphore:

* Set semaphore to `1`.
* Take any waiting process from the queue and resume its execution.


The **wait** operation **blocks** until the resource becomes available.
{:.info}

Increasing, decreasing and testing the semaphore **must** be **atomic** operations to avoid race conditions between processes and the semaphore variable.
{:.warning}

## `wait()` & `signal()`
These functions are **indivisible** (**atomic**) operations:

When one thread is executing the code between them, no other thread can do so.
{:.info}

They can be used to enforce mutual exclusion by enclosing critical regions.

Java provides a semaphore class with `acquire` and `release` methods instead of `wait` and `signal`.

## Types of Semaphore

* A **binary** semaphore can only take values of 0 or 1.
* **Counting** semaphores are unrestricted and allow control access to limited resources.
* When a process/task/thread is in a critical region (controlled by $S$), no other process (needing $S$) can enter theirs.
	* Hence, keep critical regions as small as possible.

Use of semaphores requires careful programming.
{:.warning}