---
title: Producer-Consumer Problem
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
A producer process and a consumer process communicate via a buffer.

* Producer Cycle:
	1. Produce item.
	1. Deposit in buffer.
* Consumer Cycle:
	1. Extract item from buffer.
	1. Process the item.
	
There can be many producers and consumers, sometimes in a chain.
{:.info}

## Issues
We have to ensure that:

* Producer cannot put items in a **full** buffer.
* Consumer cannot extract items from buffer if it is **empty**.
* Buffer is not accessed by two thread **simultaneously**.

## Implementation
### Main Thread

```java
public class Prodcon
{
	public static void main (String args[])
	{ // Create buffer, producer & consumer
		Buffer b = new Buffer();
		Producer p = new Producer(b);
		Consumer c = new Consumer(b);
		p.start(); c.start();
		...
	}
}
```

### Producer and Consumer Classes

```java
class Producer extends Thread {
private Buffer b;
	public Producer (Buffer buf) {
		b = buf;
	}
	public void run() {
		int m;
		...
		b.insert(m);
		...
	}
}
```

Consumer is similar, but calls `n = b.remove()`
{:.info}

### Buffer Class With Semaphore

```java
class Buffer {
	private int v;
	private volatile boolean empty=true;
	
	public void insert (int x) {
		while (!empty)
			; // null loop
		empty = false;
		v = x;
	}
	public int remove() {
	while (empty)
		; // null loop
	empty = true;
	return (v);
	}
}
```

* The `empty` boolean tells us if the buffer is empty or not.
	* `volatile` ensures the computer will re-load the variable each time it is tested, rather than transferring it to a register.
	
		This says that the value could change without the compiler being aware.
		{:.info}
* A producer will wait while the buffer is full. A consumer will wait while it is empty.
	* **Busy** waiting (**spinlock**)
	* This **simulates** the `wait` operation.
* Busy waiting is inefficient
	* A thread or process does nothing useful while it has the CPU.
	* Spinlocks are useful only in a multiprocessor situation when expected wait time is **very short**.

#### Yielding
It may be more efficient for a waiting thread or process to relinquish control of the CPU:

```
public void insert (int x) {
	while(!empty)
		Thread.yield();
	empty = false;
	v = x;
}
```

The `yield()` call tells the JVM that the thread is willing to give up the CPU.

* The JVM might **ignore** it depending on the implementation.
	* This is why it is in a `while` loop so that `!empty` is tested many times.
* It is non-deterministic and platform dependant.