---
title: COMP124 - Language Components
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
Each HLL has three components:

* Lexical Components (**tokens**)
* Syntactical Components (**structure**)
* Semantic Components (**meaning**)

## Lexicon
The lexical component is a list of all the legal words (**elementary expressions**) in the language, together with information about each word.

### Example
In Java `import`, `public` and `else` are legal words. They go together with information about their meanings and roles.

## Syntax
The syntax defines the form and structure of legal expressions of the language

### Example
In Java:

```java
double private x, y;
```
is not a correct fragment of code. It is **lexically** correct but not **syntactically**.

## Semantics
The semantic component deals with meaning of the expressions. 

In programming languages, the semantic component defines a course of action to be performed when executing a particular fragment of a program.

### Example
In Java, the fragment:

```java
if (m < n)
	System.out.println("The minimum is " + m);
```

means:

> Check if $m<n$. If it is true, then print the message, otherwise skip this instruction.

## Programming Language Description
The precise description of a programming language is needed for the translator to:

* analyse the source code;
* generate correct and unambiguous code.

A key part of the precise description of any programming language is the **syntax** rules that make up its **grammar**.

### Informal Narrative Description
This is an English language description of the language:

> Pascal is written free form with no required layout. Tokens are separated by space, tabs, carriage returns, or comments. The basic Pascal structure is the block. A block consists of the following components:

> ```
> label declarations
> constant definitions
> ...
> procedure and functions declarations
> program statements
> ...
> ```

* It is **easily understandable** by a human and it is useful as a reference source.
* It is not **precise** and **unambiguous** enough to be used by a compiler or interpreter.
* We need a much more **formal** way to define the correct syntax of a language.