---
title: Process Creation
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
On most systems, processes are created (spawned) by other processes. The original process is the **parent**, and the new process is the **child**.

Hence we end up with a kind of ancestral
tree of processes.

## Unix
* The `exec()` system call allows one program to execute another:
	* They stay in same process.
	* New program overwrites caller
* The `fork()` call spawns a new process:
	* Child is identical to parent.
* The `wait()` call suspends parent until child terminates.

### Execution Scenarios

1. `P1` execs `P2`:

	```mermaid
	graph LR
	P1 --> P2 
	P2--> 1[ ]
	```
1. `P1` forks, then child execs `P2`:
	
	```mermaid
	graph LR
	P1 --> P2 
	P1 --> 1[ ]
	P2 --> 2[ ]
	```
1. The same as before by now `P1` issues a `wait()` call.
	
	```mermaid
	graph LR
	P1 --> P2 
	P1 -.-> 1[ ]
	P2 --> 1[ ]
	1 --> 2[ ]
	```

### Unix Processes

1. At startup, kernel creates process 0:
	* Kernel-level process, so can access kernel code and data structures directly.
	* Eventually becomes swapper, responsible for moving processes to/from disk.
	* Before this, it spawns other kernel-level processes.
1. Process 1 is `init` (now `systemd` on Linux):
	* Parent of all other processes.
	* Spawns daemon processes.
	* Spawns process for user login.
1. Unix processes:
	* When user logs on, the login process checks name and password against stored details, then execs shell.
	* User can alter their preferred choice of shell.
1. Shell prompts for commands, then forks and execs to carry out those commands.
1. At logout, shell process dies:
	* `init`/`systemd` is informed, and creates new login process.
	
## Zombies and Orphans
Parent processes usually wait for their children to die. If the death of a child is not acknowledged by the parent (via wait call), the child becomes a **zombie**:

* No resources, but still present in process table.

If parent dies before its children, the children become **orphans**

* Get "adopted" by `init` process.

## Daemons

* Not associated with any user or terminal.
* Run permanently in background.
* Perform tasks requested of them by other processes.
	* Act as server process.
* Carry out the background tasks of the OS:
	* Subsystem managers are background processes.
	* They need their own time on the CPU.