---
title: COMP124 - Threads
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
A thread is an independent and parallel part of a process.

Each thread has its own:

* Program counter
* Stack space

However, unlike a process, threads share:

* Program code
* Data
* Open files and other system resources

with the other member threads in the process.

Threads are handled at a higher level than processes, and can be switched without involvement of the operating system kernel.

* If this is the case, thread switching is very rapid and efficient. such threads are known as **user-level threads**.

Threads are especially important for the development of **event-driven programs**. 

## Topology
A thread can be through of as a **lightweight** process.

Threads are created within a normal process.

Independent tasks can be split from the main process into individual threads.
{:.info}

## Benefits

* Ease of Programming (modularity)
	* Many applications need to perform several distinct tasks simultaneously. Much easier to create one separate thread per task, than to attempt to do them all within one linear program.
* Responsiveness
	* In a multi-threaded interactive application a program may be able to continue executing, even if part of it is blocked.
		* In a web browser: user waiting for image to download, but can still interact with another part of the page.
* Resource Sharing
	* Threads share memory and resources of the process they belong to, thus we have several threads all within the same address space.
* Economy
	* Threads are more economical to create and context switch as
they share the resources of the processes to which they belong.
* Utilisation of Parallel Architectures
	* In a multiprocessor architecture, where each thread may be running in parallel on a different processor, the benefits of multi-threading can be increased.