---
title: Dining Philosophers Problem - Java Code
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
## Code
### Philosopher Thread

```java
public void run() {
	while (alive) {
		think();
		stick[i].get();
		stick[(i + 1) % 5].get();
		eat();
		stick[i].put_down();
		stick[(i + 1) % 5].put_down();
	}
}
```

### Chopstick Class

```java
class Chopstick {
	private volatile boolean in_use = false;
	
	public synchronized get() {
		while(in_use) {
			try {
				wait();
			}
			catch {
				...;
			}
		}
		in_use = true;
	}
	public synchronized put_down() {
		in_use = false;
		notify();
	}
	...
}
```

In comparison to a **producer-consumer** model, we don't have to wait to release the resource. We also only `notify()` when we release the resource.
{:.info}

### Explanation

* Each chopstick object has a lock associated with it.
* This prevents two philosophers grabbing a chopstick simultaneously.
* If a philosopher needs a chopstick, but it is already in use, the philosopher is moved into the wait set.
* When the chopstick is put down, the waiting philosopher is notified and can pick it up.

## Deadlocks
Suppose each philosopher picks up the chopstick to their right simultaneously.

* Then nobody can pick up the stick on the left, and all philosophers move to the wait state.

Since nobody is releasing a stick, all philosophers wait forever.

This situation is called a **deadlock**.
{:.info}

More generally deadlock occurs in a concurrent system when each participant is waiting on others to do something.

### Solution

* Allow only $n-1$ philosophers to dine simultaneously.
* Introduce **asymmetry**:
	* Even indices pick up chopstick in order **right then left**.
	* Odd indices use **left then right**.
* Insist that both chopsticks are claimed at the same time.
	* In the same **critical region**.
	
All of the above complicate the code.
{:.warning}

## Starvation

1. Suppose $P_0$ and $P_2$ grab their chopsticks first.
	* Then $P_1,P_3$ and $P_4$ have to wait
1. If $P_0$ and $P_2$ put down their stick and them immediately claim them again, the others will never eat.
	* Even if $P_0$ and $P_2$ take turns, $P_1$ cannot eat.
	
More generally, **starvation** occurs when one or more of the participants in a concurrent system is denied access to resources.