---
title: Inter-process Communication
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---

## Process interaction
Processes that do not need to interact with any other processes are known as **independent processes**.

In modern systems, many processes will work together. These are known as **cooperating processes**.

The operating system provides synchronisation and communication mechanisms for cooperating processes.

## Synchronisation & Communication
### Synchronisation
If a process can only do its work when another process has reached a certain point, we need a way of informing it such as:

* Semaphores and signals.
### Communication
One process passes data directly to another process. In Unix this can be done with:

* Pipes and sockets.

### Unix Signals
A process can usually be terminated by typing `CTRL-C`:

* Actually sends a signal to process.
* Process responds by aborting.

Signals can be sent from one process to another:

* `signal()` system call.

Signals can be sent from the command line using `kill` command:

```bash
 $ kill -<signal> <pid>
```

`kill -9 12345` sends signal `9` (kill signal) to process `12345`
{:.info}

#### Responding to Signals
A receiving process can respond to a signal in three ways:

* Perform default action (e.g. abort).
* Ignore the signal.
* **Catch** the signal:
	* Execute a designated procedure.
	
The ‘kill’ signal (signal 9) cannot be caught or ignored.

* Guaranteed way to stop process

### Example Kill Signals

| Number | Name | Action |
| :-- | :-- | :-- |
| 1 | `HUP` | Hang up |
| 2 | `INT` | Interrupt |
| 3 | `QUIT` | Quit |
| 6 | `ABRT` | Abort |
| 9 | `KILL` | Non-catch-able, non-ignorable kill |
| 14 | `ALRM` | Alarm clock |
| 15 | `TERM` | Software termination signal |

### Pipes
The UNIX command `wc –l <file>` counts the number of lines in file.

If we just type `wc –l` we don’t get an error. Instead, data is read from standard input (keyboard by default).

* Similarly for output files and standard output (screen).

The pipe symbol `|` attaches the standard output of one program to the standard input of another:

```bash
 $ who | wc -l
```

#### Common `wc` flags

| Flag | Action |
| :-- | :-- |
| `-l` | Number of lines |
| `-w` | Number of words |
| `-c` | Number of characters |

By default, all three stats are displayed. Flags state what stats appear.
{:.info}

### Sockets
A socket is a communication endpoint of a channel between two processes:

* Unlike pipes, communication is bi-directional.
* Unlike pipes, the processes:
	* Do not need to have the same lineage.
	* Do not need to be on the same machine.
	* Do not even need to be on the same local-area network.

When two processes communicate using sockets, one is designated the **server** and the other the **client**:

* In some cases, doesn’t matter which is which.

More usually, a **daemon** server process offers a service to many clients.

Usually pipes and sockets are implemented as files in a special part of the file system.
{:.info}