---
title: COMP124 - Memory Fragmentation
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
## Simple Memory Management

* Memory is allocated to program in contiguous **partitions** from one end of the store to the other.
* Each process has a **base**, or **datum** (where it starts).
* Each process also has a **limit** (length).

### Filling Empty Memory
With this method you are unable to move existing programs in memory. This results in fragmentation and ineffective memory usage.

## Choosing Programs
In a multiprogramming system where we have a queue of programs waiting, select a program of the right size to fit.

This has the following problems:

* Large programs may never get loaded (**permanent blocking** or **starvation**).
* Small gaps are created (**fragmentation**).

### Avoiding Starvation
To avoid starvation, we may need to let a large program hold up the queue until enough space becomes available.

In general we have to make a choice of which selection policy to use:

* First fit:
	* Choose first partition of suitable size.
* Best fit:
	* Choose smallest partition which is big enough.
* Worst fit:
	* Choose the biggest partition.

## Fragmentation
When fragmentation is severe the following is true:

* 50% rule:
	* For first-fit, if the amount of memory allocated is $n$, then the amount of unusable owing to fragmentation is $\frac 1 2 n$.
* May have to compact memory:
	* Requires programs to be dynamically relocatable. 

This is difficult when dealing with large programs.
{:.info}

## Other Issues

* Shortage of Memory:
	* Arising from fragmentation or anti-starvation policy.
	* May not be able to support enough users.
	* May have difficulty loading enough programs to obtain a good **job mix**.
* Imposes limitations on program structure:
	* Not suitabel for shareing routines and data.
	* Does not reflect high level language structures.
	* Does not handle memory expansion well.
* Swapping is inefficient.

## Swapping
To start more programs than can fit into physical memory a swap must be used:

* During scheduling, a process image may be swapped in, and another swapped out to make room:
	* Aldo helps to prevent starvation.
* For efficiency, you may have dedicated **swap space** on a disk.
	* This is as opposed to a swap file.

Swapping whole processes adds considerably to the time of a **context switch**.
{:.warning}