---
title: File Management
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
## Disk Hardware
Disks are based around the concept of blocks:

* Disks are split into block of a certain size.
* Files fill up one or more blocks.
* Only one file can fill each block, so some wasted space if a file is smaller than the block.

Operating system determines the block size and imposes programmatic access to physical devices.

## File System
* Logical vs. physical organisation of file.
* Most file systems are tree-structured:

	```mermaid
	graph TD
	/ --- etc
	/ --- bin
	/ --- usr
	/ --- home
	usr --- ub[bin]
	home --- staff
	home --- students
	students --- folder1
	students --- folder2
	folder1 --- file1
	folder1 --- file2
	folder1 --- file3
	```
	
	The logical organisation is not related to the physical structure.
	{:.info}
	
### Directories
Non-leaf nodes are directories:

* Contain list of filenames plus further into about each file.

#### Unix Inodes
Directory entry consists of filename and **inode number**:

* Inode number references (points to) an inode file descriptor.

An inode contains info such as:

* File owner
* Permissions
* Modify and Access Times
* Size
* Type
	* Regular
	* Special (such as `/dev` and links)
* Location on Disk

### File Types
Windows uses file extensions to indicate application.

On Unix you can execute any file:

* Exec will look for **magic number** at head of a valid executable binary file.
* If the number is not present, exec looks for `#!` followed by a name of a program to execute:
	
	```bash
	#!/bin/bash
	```
	
* Otherwise it assumes it is a shell script and creates an instance of a user's shell to process it.

### File-store Allocation
File-store is divided into fixed-size blocks.

Blocks not currently allocated to files are maintained in a **free list**.

Several strategies for allocating blocks:

* Contiguous
* Linked
* File allocation table (FAT)
* Indexed (NTFS)

#### The Free List
This represents the free block on a block device. 

It can be a simple **bit vector**. Bit vectors are simple and efficient if kept in memory. There can be issues though:

* Needs writing to the disk every so often.
* May be huge:
	* 80GB disk with 512 byte blocks needs 20MB for a free list.

An alternative is to chain all free blocks into a **linked list**. 

These methods use the disk to store information about the allocation of the disk.
{:.info}