---
title: Subroutine Parameters 
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
The simplest kind of subroutine performs an identical function each time it is called and required no further information.

There are two main forms of parameters:

* Value parameters
* Reference parameters

## Value Parameters
In this case the additional information will be some static value. If your function uses a value then you are **passing by value**.

## Reference Parameters
These are the addresses of variables and not the values themselves. This would be useful if the subroutine changes the memory contents in-place, as opposed to returning a value. 

This is known as **pass by reference**.

## Using Registers for parameters
This is the simplest method of passing parameters into subroutines.

Both types of parameter can be passed this way.

### Example - Pass by Value
Call procedure to determine bigger of 2 numbers. The numbers are  passed in eax and `ebx`. Result returned in `eax`.

```c
	...
	mov eax, first
	mov ebx, second	; calling
	call bigger	; sequence
	mov max, eax
	...
	
bigger: proc
	cmp eax, ebx
	jl second_big
	ret
second_big:
	mov eax, ebx
	ret
bigger: endp
```

### Example - Pass by Reference

Swap 2 variables by passing their addresses in `eax` and `ebx`.

```c
	...
	lea eax, first
	lea ebx, second
	call swap
	...
	
swap: proc
	mov temp, [eax]
	mov [eax], [ebx]
	mov [ebx], temp
	ret
swap: endp
```

## Problem
If you have more than three parameters is is better to use the stack to avoid running out of registers.

### Example
Call a procedure to multiple top 2 values on stack, leaving result in `eax`.

```c
	push num1	; put first num on stack
	push num2	; put second num on stack
	call multiply
	mov result, eax	; store result
	...
	
multiply: proc
	pop ebx	; save return address
	pop eax	; pop a value from stack to eax
	mov tmp, eax	; store this value
	pop eax	; pop next value from the stack
	mul eax, tmp	; multiply the two values
	push ebx	; put ret address back on stack
	ret
multiply: endp
```

We must save the return address from the top of the stack when we use the stack for procedures.
{:.warning}