---
title: COMP124 - Dynamic Loading
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
This makes memory usage more efficient by only loading what part of a program is needed at any time.

The program image could consist of the following parts:

* Main program
* Different routines, classes
* Error routines

Dynamic loading allows only parts of the image to be loaded, as necessary.
{:.info}

When a routine calls another routine, it checks to see if it has been loaded.

* If not the **relocatable linking loader** is called.

This gives the advantage that unused routines are never loaded.

## Linking
Linking is the integration of user code with system or 3$^{rd}$ party libraries.

* Typically done directly after the compilation process.

### Static Linking
Copies of the libraries are included in the final binary program image:

* Can result in large images due to inclusion of many libraries.
	* These libraries may link to more libraries.
* Wasteful both in terms of disc storage and main memory.
* Can be managed by dynamic loading, but shared libraries are still repeated in memory multiple times.

### Dynamic Linking
A stub is included in the image for each library routine this indicates how to:

* Locate a memory resident library routine:
	* If already loaded.
* Load the library:
	* If not loaded.

Allows re-entrant code to be shared between processes:

* Supports library updates (including versioning).
	
	Libraries are not automatically updated when using static linking.
	{:.info}
* Keeps disc images small.

This requires some assistance from the OS as lower level memory organisation is necessary.
{:.warning}

## Memory Organisation
To help solve some of the software problems arising from the linear store, more complex memory models are used which organise the store hierarchically:

* **Segmentation**
	* Subdivision of the address space into logically separate regions.
* **Paging**
	* Physical subdivision of the address space for memory management.

