---
title: COMP124 - Handling Deadlock
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
## Dealing with Deadlock

* Prevention
	* Build systems where deadlock couldn't possibly occur.
* Avoidance
	* Make decisions dynamically as to which resource requests can be granted.
* Detection and Recovery
	* Allow deadlock to occur, then cure it.
* Ignore the Problem

## Deadlock Prevention
There are several techniques to prevent deadlock:

* Force processes to claim all resources in one operation.
	* Problem of under-utilisation.
	* Process might hog a resource it no longer needs.
* Require processes to claim resources in pre-defined order.
	* Resource $A$ always before resource $B$.
	* Avoids processes waiting for each other.
* Grant request only if all allocated resources released first.
	* Release resource $A$ before allowing claim for resource $B$.
	* Avoids processes hogging resources needlessly.

## Deadlock Avoidance
Requires information about which resources a process plans to use.

When a request is made, system analyses allocation graphs to see if it could lead to deadlock:

* If so, process is forced to wait.
* Can lead to reduces throughput and process starvation.
	* Might not actually need to wait.
	
This is done by analysis of **cycles**.
{:.info}

## Detection and Recovery

* Requires analysis of a **wait-for** graph:

	This is similar to the directed graph seen earlier.
	{:.info}
	* Costly to do for every request.
	* May be better to do at regular intervals, or when CPU usage deteriorates too much.
* Recovery could involve process termination.
	* All involved:
		* May mean huge loss of computation.
	* One at a time:
		* Expensive; requires re-run of detection algorithm after each termination.
* Recovery could involve pre-emption, with its own problems:
	* Choice of victim.
	* Rollback
	* Starvation
	
## Ignoring Deadlock

This is the common approach for Windows, Unix, Java and others.
{:.info}

Why is this useful to implement:

* Cheap to implement.
* Saves a lot of processing time.
* Risk of deadlock is small in most well-written systems.

	This relies on programs to incorporate deadlock avoidance themselves.
	{:.info}
* Modern processors are faster.
* Puts burden onto the end user.