---
title: Subsystem Managers
tags: COMP124 Lectures
---
## Memory Manager
This manager is in charge of main memory and making sure requests are legal.

### Tasks

* Preserves and protects the space in main memory that is occupied by the OS itself.
* Checks validity of each request for memory space.
* For legal requests, allocates areas of memory not already in use.
* In a multi-user system, keeps track of which users are using which section of memory.
* De-allocates sections of memory that are no longer needed.

## Processor Manager
The processor manager decides how to allocate the central processing unit (CPU).

### Tasks

* Creates processes when necessary to carry out tasks.
* Performs initialisation of new processes.
* Keeps track of the status of processes.
* Assigns processes to the CPU when available.
* Changes process states as events occur.
* Handles termination of processes on completion or abort.
* Handles inter-process communication.
* Manages process queues and prioritisation.

## Device Manager
The device manager monitors every device and control unit.

### Tasks

* Allocates the system’s devices (printers, disk drives), in accordance with the system’s scheduling policy.
* Deals with multiple requests for same device.
* Performs communication with the device during operation.
* De-allocates devices when no longer required.

## File Manager
The file manager keeps track of every file in the system.

### Tasks

* Organises all files, including data files, compilers, application programs, into directory structures.
* Manages the locations of files on disk.
* Enforces restrictions on who has access to which files (using a pre-determined access policy).
* Deals with all standard file operations.
	* Open, close, delete, read, write.

## Network Manager
The Network Manager provides the facilities for users to share resources while controlling user access to them:

* Resources connected to local network.
* Disks, printers...

The network stack provides access to the network.

We will not be looking at networking on this module.
{:.info}

## Interaction Between OS Managers
Each OS manager has specific, individual tasks to perform but, it is not enough for each to operate on its own.

### Example
Suppose a user types in a command at the keyboard to execute a program. The following steps must occur in sequence:

1. Device manager
	* Receives keystrokes and builds up command line. Informs processor manager that input has been received.
1. Processor Manager
	* Activates process awaiting a command. Process checks validity of command, and then tries to execute the corresponding program.
1. File Manager
	* Checks to see if the program file is already in memory. If not, it finds it on external storage and issues request for it.
1. Device Manager
	* Communicates with the disk drive and retrieves the program file from disk.
1. Memory Manager
	* Allocates space for the program and records its location. Continues to deal with changes to memory requirements as program runs.
1. Processor Manager
	* Creates a process for the new program and begins its execution.