---
title: Wheeled Motion
tags: COMP329 Lectures
---
## Four Basic Wheel Types
* **Standard Wheel**
* **Spherical Wheel** - A ball with omnidirectional movement.
* **Castor Wheel** - A wheel that can rotate around a castor and it's own axle.
* **Swedish Wheel** - A wheel made of 45 degree rollers. This allows passive motion in the direction of the rollers.

## Characteristics of Wheeled Vehicles
* Stability is guaranteed with 3 wheels
	* This is improved by using 4 or more wheels.
* Bigger wheels allow the robot to overcome higher obstacles.
* Most wheel arrangements are **non-holonomic**
	* There are constraints in the direction that the vehicle can move.
* Combining actuation and steering on one wheel complicates design and adds odometry errors.

## Locomotion of Wheeled Robots
The velocity of a wheel is determined by the wheel diameter and the change in rotation over time ($\omega=\frac{\Delta\theta}{\Delta t}$) 

$$
v = \omega r
$$

This is an ideal scenario where there are no losses or deformation.
{:.warning}

Wheels have two **degrees of freedom**. They can **rotate** in the x-axis and **translate** in the y-axis.
{:.info}

## Mobility
The manoeuvrability of a vehicle depends on the **degree of mobility**:

* $\delta_m$ quantifies the degrees of **controllable freedom** based on changes to the wheel's velocity.

$$
\delta_m = 3 - N_k
$$

where $N_k$ is the number independent kinematic constraints.

Independent means that they are on different axes. 
{:.info}

> $\delta_m$ quantifies the degrees of controllable freedom based on **changes in wheel velocity**.

### Trike Degree of Mobility
A tricycle has:

* Two wheels in the same axis as the back.
	* Even if they can turn independently they are on the same axis, therefore **dependant**. 
* A front steering wheel.

This gives **two kinematic constraints** therefore the degree of mobility is:

$$
\delta_m = 3 - 2 = 1
$$

## Steerablity
The **degree of steerability** ($\delta_s$) is the number of **independent** steerable wheels (where $0\leq\delta_s\leq2$).

> $\delta_s$ quantifies the degrees of controllable freedom based on **changes in wheel orientation**.

## Manoverability
The **degree of manoeuvrability** $\delta_M$
: The overall degrees of freedom that a robot can manipulate by changing the wheel's speed and orientation

$$
\delta_M = \delta_m+\delta_s
$$

This is an indicator as to how easy it is for a robot to move around.
{:.info}

## Non-Holonomic Constraints
Vehicles with **non-holonomic constraints** are unable to move in all directions of a 2D plane:

* A Bike has non-holonomic contraints as it has to rotate in order to go left or right.
* A ball is holonomic as it can move in any direction.