---
title: Agents & Robots
tags: COMP329 Lectures
---

Agent
: An agent is a computer system that is situated in some environment, and that is capable of autonomous action in that environment in order to meet its delegated objectives.

Agents can make their own decisions. Tele-operated systems aren't agents.
{:.warning}

## Mobile Robotics
There are three main questions in mobile robotics:

* Where am I?
	* Is there some sort of homing action?
* What is the target?
* How do I get there?

## Types of Agents
Agents are on a scale of autonomy:

* **Simple agents** - Daemons, thermostats.

### Agents vs Objects

| Agent | Object |
| :-- | :-- |
| Agents are autonomous. | Objects do it because they have to. |
| Agents are smart (proactive, reactive, social). | Objects only act on request. |
| Agents act because they get a reward. | |

## Intelligent Agents
Intelligent agents exhibit three types of behaviour:

* Reactive (environment aware)
* Pro-active (goal-driven)
* Social Ability

### Proactiveness
This is the act of generating and attempting to achieve goals, not solely by events.

This also includes recognising opportunities to achieve it's goals.
{:.info}

### Reactivity
If a program's environment is fixed then it can act deterministically. We can react to changes in the environment.

### Social Ability
This is the ability in agents to interact with other agents via **cooperation**, **coordination** and **negotiation**.

The basis of this is communication.
{:.info}

Cooperation
: Working together as a team to achieve a goal.

Coordination
: Managing the interdependences between activities (what should be done in what order).

Negotiation
: The ability to reach agreements on matters of common interest.

	Typically involves **offer** and **counter-offer**, with compromises made by participants.
	{:.info}

### Other Properties

Mobility
: The ability for agents to move around a non-deterministic environment.

Rationality
: Whether an agent will act in order to achieve it's goals.

Veracity
: Whether an agent will knowingly communicate false information.

Benevolence
: Whether agents have conflicting goals or are working together.

Learning/Adaptation
: Whether agents improve performance over time.
