---
title: Sorting - Bucket & Radix Sort
tags: COMP202 Lectures
---
## Bucket Sort
Bucket sort is not based on comparisons but on using **keys** as indices of a **bucket array**.

1. Initially all items of the input sequence $S$ are moved to appropriate buckets.
	
	An item with key $k$ is moved to bucket $B[k]$.
	{:.info}

1. Then move all items back into $S$ according to their order of appearance in consecutive buckets.

### Bucket Sort Pseudo-code

* Input - A sequence $S$ of items with integer keys indexed from 0.
* Output - Sequence $S$ sorted in non-decreasing order of keys.


```
for each item x in S
	do
		let k be key of item x
		B[k] = remove(x,S)
for i = 0 to N - 1
	do
		for each item x in sequence B[i]
			do S = remove(x, B[i])
```

## Radix Sort
This is an type of bucket sort that was originally used by punched card sorting machines. It can be used to sort **ordered pairs** into **lexicographic order**, where each coordinate lies in the range of integers.

In general, we can use radix sorting to sort ordered d-tuples into lexicographic ordering.

A d-tuple is a tuple with at most $d$ digits.
{:.info}

If words have uneven length then no letter is less than any letter: $\text{ab} < \text{abc}$.

### Radix Sort Method
Sort a single column of digits, from the **least to most** significant digit, making $d$ passes over the data to do so.

$d$ is the number of place-values in your largest number.
{:.info}

We should **stably sort** each column. This means that if there is a **tie** then the **original order** is preserved.

| Original List | $d=1$ | $d=2$ | $d=3$ |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 159 | 742 | 108 | 108 |
| 496 | 125 | 125 | 125 |
| 375 | 496 | 742 | 159 | 
| 125 | 896 | 357 | 357 |
| 896 | 357 | 159 | 496 |
| 742 | 108 | 496 | 742 |
| 108 | 159 | 896 | 896 |

### Radix Sort Time Analysis
For a list with $n$ items and the largest number being $d$ digits long radix sort will take:

$$
O(d(n+N))
$$

where $N$ is $\max(n,d)$.