---
title: Dynamic Programming Applications - Fibonacci, Knapsack & Weighted Interval Scheduling
tags: COMP202 Lectures
---
Dynamic programming is similar to divide-and-conquer however, recursive calls are replaced by **looking up** pre-computed values. We can use it to compute optimisation problems where a brute force search is infeasible.

A typical approach to solve a problem using dynamic programming is to first find a **recursive** solution to the problem:

* Once this is found, we then try to determine a way to compute the solutions to the sub-problems in a bottom up approach.

	This avoids recomputing the same solutions many times.
	{:.info}

## Fibonacci Numbers
We have covered a dynamic programming approach to solving this problem in the following lecture:

* [Dynamic Programming Algorithms - 1 - Fibonacci Numbers]({{site.baseurl}}/comp108/lectures/2021/05/05/1.html) - `COMP108`

## {0, 1} Knapsack Problem
Previously we have covered sub-optimal solutions to this problem using a greedy approach. By using **dynamic programming** we can make an **optimal** solution that doesn't have exponential time.

See [Greedy Algorithm Applications - Knapsack, Scheduling, Clustering]({site.baseurl}/comp202/lectures/2022/03/08/2.html#fractional-knapsack-problem) to revise the notation used.
{:.info}

### {0, 1} Knapsack Problem Solution
Let $S_k=\{1,2,\ldots,k\}$ denote the set containing the first $k$ items and define $S_0=\emptyset$.

Let $B[k,w]$ be the **maximum** total benefit obtained using a subset of $S_k$, and having total weight at most $w$.

Then we define $B[0,w]=0$ for each $w\leq W_\max$ and:

$$
B[k,w]=
\begin{cases}
B[k-1,w]&\text{if } w<w_k\\
\max\{B[k-1,w],b_k+B[k-1,w-w_k]\} & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

Our solution is then $B[n,W_\max]$.

To make our solution as easy as possible to find, we will compute these values from the **bottom-up**:

* First we compute $B[1,w]$ for each $w\leq W_\max$ and so on.

We can implement this in the following pseudo-code:

01knapSack(S,W)

```
for w = 0 to W
	do 
		B[0, w] = 0
for k = 1 to n
	do
		for w = 0 to wk - 1
			do 
				B[k, w] = B[k - 1, w]
		for w = W downto wk
			do
				if B[k - 1, w - wk] + bk > B[k - 1, w] then
					B[k, w] = B[k - 1, w - wk] + bk
				else
					B[k, w] = B[k - 1, w]
```

* Input - Set $S$ of $n$ items with weights $w_i$, benefits $b_i$ and total weight $W$.
* Output - A subset $T$ of $S$ with weight at most $W$.

### {0, 1} Knapsack Problem Time Complexity
The running time of `01knapSack` is dominated by the two nested `for` loops, where the outer loop iterates $n$ times and the inner loop $W$ times.

Therefore, this algorithms finds the **highest benefit subset** of $S$ with **total weight** at most $W$ in:

$$
O(nW)
$$

## Weighted Interval Scheduling
This is similar to [interval scheduling]({{site.baseurl}}/comp202/lectures/2022/03/08/2.html#interval-scheduling) however, now the tasks have a value $v_i$.

The goal is to schedule a subset of non-conflicting intervals that have a maximal total value.

We cannot achieve this goal using a greedy approach.
{:.info}

### Weighted Interval Scheduling Solution
A divide and conquer approach would look like the following:

1. Sort the intervals in terms of their finishing time.
1. Define $p(j)$ to be the interval $i$ where:
	* $i$ and $j$ are non-conflicting.
	* $i$ has the largest finish time whilst occuring before $j$ ($f_i\leq s_j$).
	
	$p(j)=0$ if there is no such $i$.
	{:.info}
1. Define $S_j$ to be the optimal solution and $\text{Opt}(j)$ to be the value of $S_j$.
	* If $j\in S_j$ then:
	
		$$
		\text{Opt}(j) = v_j + \text{Opt}(p(j))
		$$
	* If $j\notin S_j$ then:
	
		$$
		\text{Opt} = \text{Opt}(j - 1)
		$$
1. Therefore:

	$$
	\text{Opt}(j) = \max\{v_j+\text{Opt}(p(j)), \text{Opt}(j-1)\}
	$$
	
	To avoid an exponential time solution, we solve all values $\text{Opt}(1), \ldots,\text{Opt}(n)$ in advance of the next step.
1. We can then derive $S_j$ recursively depending on the value above:

	$$
	S_j=
	\begin{cases}
	S_{p(j)} \cup \{j\} & \text{if } \text{Opt}(j) = v_j + \text{Opt}(p(j))\\
	S_{j-1} & \text{if } \text{Opt} = \text{Opt}(j - 1)
	\end{cases}
	$$