---
title: Transport Layer Services
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
The transport layer provides **logical communication** between application processes running on different hosts.

* Sender - Breaks the application messages into **segments** and passes to the network layer.
* Receiver - **Reassembles** the segments into **messages** and passes them to the application layer.

There are two transport layer protocols available:

* TCP
* UDP

## Network Layer vs. Transport Layer
The network layer is a logical communication between **hosts**. 

This is similar to the postal service.
{:.info}

The transport layer **extends** this network service to provide a logical communication between **processes**:

* It relies on and enhances network layer services.

## Transport Layer Actions
The **sender**:

1. Is passed an application-layer message.
1. Determines segment header fields values.
1. Creates a segment.
1. Passes the segment to IP.

The **receiver**:

1. Receives a segment from IP.
1. Checks header values.
1. Extracts the application-layer message.
1. Demultiplexes the message up to the application via a socket.

## Two Principle Internet Transmission Protocols

**TCP** (Transmission Control Protocol):

* Reliable, in-order delivery.
* Congestion Control
* Flow Control
* Connection Setup

**UDP** (User Datagram Protocol)

* Unreliable, unordered delivery.
* No-frills extension of “best-effort” IP.

The following services are **not** available:

* Delay Guarantees
* Bandwidth Guarantees