---
title: COMP211 - Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Applications
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
This lecture continues from [The Application Layer - Network Applications]({{site.baseurl}}/comp211/lectures/2021/10/06/1.html#peer-to-peer-p2p-architecture).

## File Distribution for Client-Server Model
To send a file to $N$ clients the server must upload $N$ file copies:

* Time to send one copy: $\frac F {u_s}$
* Time to send $N$ copies $\frac{NF}{u_s}$

Each client must download a file copy:

* $d_\min=$ minimum client download rate.
* Minimum client download time: $\frac F{d_\min}$

Therefore the time to distribute $F$ to $N$ clients using the client-server approach is:

$$
D_{\text{client to server}}\geq\max\{\frac{NF}{u_s},\frac F{d_\min}\}
$$

## File Distribution for P2P
Server transmission must upload at least one copy:

* Time to send one copy: $\frac F{u_s}$

Each client must download a file copy:

* Minimum cloent download time: $\frac F{d_\min}$

Additional Clients as aggregate must download $NF$ bits:

* Max upload rate (limiting max download rate) is: $u_s +\sum u_i$

Therefore the time to distribute $F$ to $N$ client using a P2P approach is:

$$
D_\text{P2P}>\max\{\frac F{u_s},\frac F{d_\min},\frac{NF}{u_s+\sum u_i}\}
$$

As the service capacity increases linearly with $N$ the service is self-scaling.
{:.info}

## BitTorrent

* File is divided into 256Kb chunks.
* Peers in the torrent send and receive file chinks.

There are two parties:

* Tracker - Tracks peers participating in the torrent.
* Torrent - The group of peers exchanging chunks of a file.

When a new peer arrives:

1. They obtain a list of peers from the tracker.
1. Begin exchanging file chunks with the peers in the torrent.

### File Chunks
Requesting chunks:

* At any given time, different peers have different chunks.
* Periodically, you ask each peer for a list of chunks that they have.
* You request missing chunks from peers, **rares first.**

Sending chunks (tit-for-tat):

* You send chunks to those sending you chunks at the highest rate.
	* Other peers are **choked**.
	* Re-evalulate to peers every 10 seconds.
* Every 30 seconds, randomly seelct another peer to start sending chunks.
	* **Optimistically un-choke** this peer.
	* This new peer may gain rate.
	
Higher upload rate gets better trading partners, allowing you to get the file faster.
{:.info}