---
title: COMP211 - Cookies & Web-Caches (Proxy Servers)
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
## Cookies
Cookies are used to **maintain user state**. Many websites use four components to achieve this:

1. Cookie header line of HTTP **response** message.
1. Cookie header line in next HTTP **request** message.
1. Cookie file kept on user's host, managed by user's browser.
1. Back-end database at website.

A cookie is just a unique ID number stored in a file.
{:.info}

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
client ->> server: Usual HTTP request msg
server ->> database: Create ID entry
server ->> client: Usual HTTP response & "set-cookie:1678"
client ->> server: Usual HTTP request msg & "cookie:1678"
server -> database: Access
Note over server, database: Cookie specific action
server ->> client: Usual HTTP response msg
note left of client: One week later
client ->> server: Usual HTTP request msg & "cookie:1678"
server -> database: Access
Note over server, database: Cookie specific action
server ->> client: Usual HTTP response msg
```

### HTTP Cookies
Cookies can be used for:

* Authorisation 
* Shopping Carts
* Recommendations
* User Session State (Web E-Mail)

Cookies permit sites to learn a lot about you. Third party cookies allow a common identity to be tracked across multiple sites.
{:.warning}

## Web Caches (Proxy Servers)
Proxy servers allow a client request to be satisfied without involving the origin server.

* If the object is in the cache - The cache returns the object to the client.
* Else - The cache requests the object from the origin server, caches the object and sends the object to the client.

Web caching allows the following:

* Less response time for the client.
* Reducing traffic on an institutions access link.
* Enables poor content providers to operate more effectively.

### Conditional GET
This allows servers to check if their cached object is up to date. This allows:

* No object transmission delay.
* Lower link utilisation.

You can specify the date of a cached copy in the request:

```
If-modified-since: <date>
```

If the copy is up to date the server will not return the object but the following response:

```
HTTP/1.0 304 Not Modified
```

Here is the sequence of interactions:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
client ->> server: Request & "If-modified-since:<date>"
alt Object not modified
	server ->> client: "HTTP/1.0 304 Not Modified"
else Object modified
	server ->> client: "HTTP/1.0 200 OK <data>"
end
```