---
title: Reliable Data Transfer (Stop & Wait)
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
These notes are low-effort, due to catching up in this module. See [the videos and slides](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/54299/pages/3-transport-layer?module_item_id=1178720) for more detail.
{:.warning}

## Calculating Utilisation
Stop and wait protocols are inefficient as ideally they can only send one packet per round trip time.

To calculate the time to transmit a 1 MB packet into a 1 Gbps channel:

$$
D_\text{trans}=\frac LR=\frac{8000\text{ bits}}{10^9\text{ bits/sec}}=8\mu s
$$

Where:

* $D$ - Time to transmit packet.
* $L$ - Length of the packet.
* $R$ - Rate of transfer.

To find the utilisation of the medium we can use the following:

$$
U_\text{sender}=\frac{\frac LR}{\text{RTT}+\frac LR}
$$

With the previous packet, link speed, 30 ms rtt and a stop and wait protocol we can calculate the following:

$$
U_\text{sender}=\frac{0.008}{30+0.008}=0.00027
$$

This is only 0.027% utilisation.
{:.info}

## Pipelining
This allows us to send multiple packets before the first one is acknowledged. There are two main families of protocols:

### Go-Back-N Protocol
#### Sender
There is a *window* of up to $N$, consecutive transmitted but unACKed packets:

* Cumulative ACK - We must acknowledge all packets up to and including the sequence number included in the client's ACK.
* On receiving ACK(n) - Move window forward to begin at $n+1$.
* Timer is used for the oldest in-flight packet.
	* When the timer runs out, re-transmit packet $n$ and all higher sequence number packets in the window.


Due the reuse of sequence numbers we use sequence numbers of $>2N$ (more than 2 times the window size).
{:.info}

#### Receiver
This is ACK only:

* Always send ACK for correctly-received packet so far, with highest in-order sequence number.
* May generate duplicate ACKs
* Need only remember the next expected sequence number.

On receipt of out-of-order packet:

* Can discard (don’t buffer) or buffer for later.
	
	This is an implementation decision.
	{:.info}
* Re-ACK packet with highest in-order sequence number.

### Selective Repeat Protocol
In this method the receiver **individually** acknowledges all correctly received packets.

* Buffers packets, as needed, for eventual in-order delivery to the upper layer.

The sender times-out/re-transmits individually for each unACKed packet:

* Sender maintains timer for **each** unACKed packet.

The sender window:

* Has a size of $N$ consecutive seq numbers.
* The timers keep track of unACKed packets.

#### Sender
Data from above:

* If next available sequence number in window, send packet.

Timeout(n):

* Resend packet $n$, restart timer.

ACK(n) in [sendbase,sendbase+N]:

* Mark packet $n$ as received.
* If $n$ smallest unACKed packet, advance window base to next unACKed sequence number.

#### Receiver
Packet $n$ in [rcvbase, rcvbase+N-1]:

* send ACK(n)
	* Out-of-order - buffer.
	* In-order - deliver (also deliver buffered, in-order packets), advance window to next not-yet-received packet.
	
Packet $n$ in \[rcvbase-N,rcvbase-1\] (already received):

* ACK(n)

Otherwise:

* Ignore