---
title: Physical Layer - Data Rate Limits
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
The **channel capacity** can be defined in two different ways:

* **Data Rate**:
	* In bits per second.
	* Rate at which data can be communicated.
* **Bandwidth**:
	* The frequency width of the transmitted signal.
	* In cycles per second or Hz.
	* Constrained by the transmitter and medium.
	
## Nyquist Bandwidth
If the bandwidth is $B$, then the highest signal transmission (baud) rate is $2B$:

* For a binary signal the data rate supported by $B$ Hz is $2B$ bps.

This can be increased by using $M$ signal states:

* Each state encodes multiple bits.
* With no noise the maximum data rate is:

	$$
	2B\log_2(M)
	$$
	
	This is what QAM techniques use to transmit more bits per state.
	{:.info}
	
	To find the **number of bits** from the number of states $M$ you can then calculate:
	
	$$
	\log_2(M)
	$$
	
	This is as we can encode the states in binary.
	{:.info}

## Shannon's Capacity Formula
The amount of thermal noise present is measured by the ratio of signal power to noise power.

This is called the signal to noise ratio: $\frac SN$.
{:.info}

The ratio itself is not usually quoted but is represented is dB:

$$
10\log_{10}(\frac SN)
$$

Therefore for $\frac SN=100$ then this 20 dB.
{:.info}

Typical analogue voice telephone usually gives 30dB of signal to nose.

### Shannon's Law
The maximum rate of a noisy channel with bandwidth $B$ and signal to noise ratio of $\frac SN$ is:

$$
B\log_2(1+\frac SN)
$$

#### Shannon's Law Example
For a channel bandwidth of 3.1 KHz and a signal to noise ratio of 30 dB ($\frac SN=1000$), the maximum bits per second is:

$$
3100\log_2(1+1000)=30894\text{ bps}
$$

We can combine this with the Nyquist Bandwidth formula to find the maximum data rate of a noisy channel with multiple signal states.
{:.info}