---
title: The Application Layer - Transport Services
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
## Service Requirements

* Data Integrity
	* You may need 100% reliable data transfer for some types of data transfer.
	* Media streaming can often compensate for loss.
* Timing
	* Some apps require low latency for effective use of the application.
* Throughput
	* Media streaming often requires a minimum throughput to be effective.
* Security
	* Data encryption
	
### Common Applications

| Application | Data Loss | Throughput | Time Sensitive |
| :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| File transfer/dowlad | No loss | Elastic | no |
| E-mail | No Loss | Elastic | no |
| Web documents | No loss | Elastic | no |
| Telephony | Loss-tolerant | Audio: 5 Kbps - 1 Mbps, Video 2 Mbps - 8 Mbps | Yes - 10ms |
| Streaming | Loss-tolerant | Same as above | Yes, few seconds |
| Interactive games | Loss-tolerant | Kbps+ | Yes - 10ms |
| Text messaging | No loss | elastic | Dependant on application |

## Internet Transport Protocols
### TCP
This method provides:

* Reliable Transport
* Flow Control
	* Sender won't overwhelm the receiver.
* Congestion Control

It doesn't provide:

* Timing
* Minimum throughput guarantee
* Security

This protocol is **connection-oriented** as a setup it required between teh client and server processes.
{:.info}

### UDP
This method provides:

* Unreliable Data Transfer

It doesn't provide:

* Reliable Transport
* Flow Control
* Congestion Control
* Timing
* Minimum throughput guarantee
* Security

This method has no guarantees. However, this enables the fastest connections and quickest setup times.
{:.warning}

## Security
TCP and UDP sockets provide no security methods, as a result there are additional protocols that allow this service.

Transport layer security (TLS) provides:

* **TCP** encrypted connections.
* Data integrity
* End-point authentication.

TLS is implemented in the **application layer**. This means that:

* Apps use TLS libraries that, in turn, use TCP.
* TLS socket API allows clear-text to be sent to the socket to traverse the network **encrypted**.