---
title: COMP211 - The Application Layer - Architectures & Processes
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
## Network Applications
These are programs that:

* Run on different end systems.
* Communicate over the network.

As this is a layered system there is no need to write software for the **network-core devices**.
{:.info}

### Client-Server Architecture
The **server** is:

* Always on host.
* Permanent IP address.
* Can use data centres for scaling.

The **clients**:

* Communicate with the server.
* May be intermittently connected.
* May have a dynamic IP address.
* **Don't communicate directly** with each other.

### Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Architecture
This architectures includes:

* No always on server.
* Arbitrary end system directly communicating.
* Peers request service from other peers and provide service to other peers.
	* Self scalability - New load also brings more service capacity.
* Peers are intermittently connected and change IP addresses.
	* Complex to manage.

## Processes Communicating
A **process** is a program running within a host:

* Within the same host, two process communicate using **inter-process communication** (defined by the OS).
* Processes in different hosts communicate by exchanging **messages**.

### Sockets
Processes send and receive messages to and from its **socket**:

* Sending a message from a socket relies on a transport infrastructure behind the port.
* There should be two sockets involved (one to send and one to receive).

### Addressing Processes
In order to identify a process you need the system's **IP address** and the **port number** associated with the process and the host.

Examples are:

* HTTP server: port 80
* SMTP server: port 25

## Application-Layer Protocols
The protocol for the application layer must define the following things:

* Types of messages exchanged.
* Message syntax.
* Message semantics
* Rules for when and how processes send & respond to messages.

You can use **open protocols**:

* Defined in RFC's
* Everyone has access to the protocol definition.
* Allows for interoperability.

Or **proprietary protocols**:

* Are made in-house and are not open to the public.