---
title: COMP211 - Congestion Control
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---

## Congestion
Congestion is where **too many sources** are sending **too much data** too fast for the **network** to handle. This can give:

* Long Delays
* Packet Loss

This is different from **flow control** where **one** sender is sending data too fast.
{:.info}

### End to End Congestion Control

* No explicit feedback from the network.
* Congestion is **inferred** from observed loss and delay.
* Approach taken from TCP.

### Network Assisted Congestion Control

* Routers provide **direct** feedback to sending and receiving hosts with flows passing through congested router.
* May indicate congestion level or explicitly set a sending rate.

This is used in the: TCP ECN, ATM and DECbit protocols.
{:.info}

## TCP Congestion Control - AMID
AMID is a distributed, asynchronous algorithm that optimised congested flow rates network wide.

> Sender can increase sending rate until packet loss (congestion) occurs, then decrease the sending rate on loss event.

We do this by using the following two methods:

* **Additive Increase**
	* Increase the sending rate by 1 maximum segment size every RTT until loss is detected.
* **Multiplicative Decrease**
	* Cut the sending rate in half at each loss event.
	
This results in a saw-tooth behaviour as the protocol probes from bandwidth.
{:.info}

### Multiplicative Decrease
In addition to the definition before the sending rate is:

* Cut in half on loss detected by triple duplicate ACK. (**TCP Reno**)
* Cut to 1 maximum segment size (MSS) when loss is detected by timeout. (**TCP Tahoe**)

### Congestion Window
The congestion window is the number of unACKed packets that can be in flight at any one time.

The behaviour roughly is:

1. Send `cwnd` bytes, wait for RTT for ACKS, then send more bytes.
	
	$$
	\text{TCP Rate} \approx\frac{\text{cwnd}}{\text{RTT}}\text{ (bytes/sec)}
	$$
	
1. TCP sender limite transmission:

	$$
	\text{LastByteSent} - \text{LastByteAcked}\leq \text{cwnd}
	$$
1. `cwnd` is dynamically adjusted in response to observed network congestion (implementing TCP congestion control).

#### TCP Slow Start
When connection begins, increase the rate **exponentially** until first loss event:

1. Initially `cwnd` = 1 MSS
1. Double `cwnd` every RTT.
1. Done by incrementing `cwnd` for every ACK received. 

To avoid congestion we can switch to linear increases in the `cwnd`:

* When `cwnd` gets to $\frac12$ of its value before timeout.

We can do this with the following implementation:

* Have a variable called `ssthresh`.
* On loss event, `ssthresh` is set to $\frac12$ of `cwnd` just before loss event.

## TCP Fairness
For a system to be fair, if $K$ TCP sessions share the same bottleneck link of bandwidth $R$, each should have an average rate of $\frac R K$.

TCP is fair as with two competing TCP sessions:

* Additive increase gives slope of 1, as throughput increases.
* Multiplicative decrease decreases throughput proportionally.

This results in equal bandwidth provided both clients have the same RTT.
{:.info}

You can open more TCP connections to the same server to make your connection "unfair".
{:.info}