---
title: COMP211 - Reliable Data Transfer (Stop & Wait)
tags: COMP211 Lectures
---
These notes are low-effort, due to catching up in this module. See [the videos and slides](https://liverpool.instructure.com/courses/54299/pages/3-transport-layer?module_item_id=1178720) for more detail.
{:.warning}

## Recovering From Errors
We can use **acknowledgements** and **negative acknowledgements** from the client to the sender:

* Acknowledgements (ACKs) - Tells the sender that the packet was received okay.
* Negative Acknowledgements (NACKs) - Tells the sender that the packet had errors.
	
	This can be removed as the sender can resend the packet if there is a timeout for an ACK.
	{:.info}

### Corrupted Acknowledgements
If an acknowledgement is lost then the sender will send a duplicate packet. We can add **sequence numbers** to keep track of if a packet is a duplicate:

* For stop and wait we can alternate between 0 and 1.
* If there is a duplicate the packet is dropped and another acknowledgement is sent.

## Packet Loss
A timer can be put on each packet:

* If an ACK is not received in time the packet is re-transmitted.
	* If the re-transmission is a duplicate then the sequence numbers will handle this.

Twice the round trip time is a reasonable starting point for the timer.
{:.info}

## Stop & Wait Sequence

**Sender**:

1. Sequence number is added to the packet.
	* 0 or 1 will do.
1. Send the packet and start timer.
1. Check if the ACK is corrupt or a NACK, if it is send the same packet.
1. Send the next packet if an ACK is received.
1. If packet times out, send it again.

**Receiver**:

1. Must check if received packet is duplicate.
1. State indicates whether 0 or 1 is expected packet sequence number.
1. If packet is duplicate send ACK.
1. If packet is in order then send ACK and pass to the application layer.