---
title: Imports, Packages & the Classpath
tags: COMP122 Lectures
---
When you are writing a large Java program you can run into the problem of a cluttered name-space. This means that you are running out of fresh names for your classes.

## Packages
A Java **package** is a collection of related classes.

* The full name of a Java class if of the form `package.class`.
* Packages can be nested.
* Packages from the "standard lib" start with `java` or `javax`.

### Example
The `System` class is in package `java.lang`. So it's full name is `java.lang.System`.

## Import
The `import` statement introduces a class to the current name-space.

The use `java.util.Scanner` to get user input we can tell the compiler to include that class at the top of a source file:

```java
import java.util.Scanner.
```

This is a convenience. Instead, without importing it, we cal still refer to `java.util.Scanner` by its full name.
{:.info}

### Apropos Convenience
The `java.lang` package is automatically available to all classes without using the `import` statement. This is why we could refer directly to `System` and write:

```java
System.out.println("Hello World");
```

instead of having to use its full package name:

```java
java.lang.System.out.println("Hello World");
```

## Creating Packages
To assign a class to a package, we need to do two things:


1. Add a package statement to the source code:

	```java
	package mypackage;
	```
	
	Classes without this live in an unnamed default package.
	{:.info}
1. Move the source file into a directory `mypackage/` Both compiler and interpreter will look for `class` files in a directory names just like their package.

Packages are not required for the assignments.
{:.info}

## Classpath
This is a list of directories from which packages are looked up.

* `javac` and `java` both have command-line arguments to set the classpath.
* The current directory is automatically added.
* You can use the environment-variables to set the classpath. (`CLASSPATH` on Linux).

## Conventions

* Package names are usually all lower case to avoid conflict with class names.
* It is common to use reversed domain names for packages.
	* Yields globally unique package names.
	* Avoids naming collisions between libraries from different sources.
		* `org.w3c.dom`