---
title: COMP122 - Methods
tags: COMP122 Lectures
---

Methods are named code blocks. They:

* are defined inside a class definition.
* can have arguments and return value.
	* They can return `void`. 
* correspond to functions or procedures in other languages.

## Defining Methods

```java
modifiers returnType methodName (parameters){
	// method body code here
}
```

* `modifiers ` determine how the method can be accessed.
* `returnType` is the type of the returned value.
* `methodName` an identifier.
* `parameters` a (comma-separated) list of arguments, each given as a type and an identifier. 
	
	Order matters!
	{:.warning}
* `// method body` the code block that defines the method's behaviour.

### Example

```java
public class MaximumDemo {
	
	public static int maximum(int a, int b) {
		if(a>= b)
			return a;
		else
			return b;
	}
}
```

* `public` and `static` are modifiers.
* `int` is the return value.
* `maximum` is the identifier.
* `a` and `b` are two arguments of type `int`.

## Signatures
The modifiers, spelling of the identifier, types and ordering of the parameters together form the **signature** of the method.

A method is uniquely identified by it's signature.
{:.info}

The following all have different signatures:

```java
public static int max (int a, int b) {}
public static int maX (int a, int b) {}
public static int max (int a, double b) {}
public static int max (double b, int a) {}
public int max (int a, int b) {}
```

This is the same as the first above:

```java
public static int max(int b, int a) {}
```

This is because the identifier of the parameter doesn't change the signature.

## `main`
The `main` method is a method like any other, except that the interpreter will look it up and call it when it starts.

We can access it's command-line parameters via `args`:

```java
public class Hello {
	public static void main(String[] args){
		System.out.print("Hello " + args[0] + "!");
	}
}
```

This will produce the following when run:

```bash
&#92;( java Hello Ben Weston
Hello Ben!
```

As the second argument is not used, it is not printed.
