---
title: COMP111
tags: COMP111
---
# Conditional Probability
Often we are interested in just part of the sample space. Conditional probability gives us a means of handling this situation.

## Example
Consider a family chosen at random from a set of families having two children (but not having twins). What is the probability that both children are boys?

A suitable sample space $S=\{BB,GB,BG,GG\}$.

It is reasonable to assume that $P(x)=\frac{1}{4}$ for all $x\in S$.

Thus $P(BB)=\frac{1}{4}$.

Now you learn that the families were selected from those who have one child at a boys' school. Does this change probabilities.

The new sample space $S'=\{BB,GB,BG\}$ and we re now looking for $P(BB|\text{at least one boy})+P(BB|S')$

The vertical line is read **given that**.

### Normalisation
$S'$ is a subset of $S$, so every outcome $x$ in $S'$ is also in $S$. It probability $P(x)\in S$ we can determine.

However, if we just take the sum of these probabilities, they will sum to less than 1. 

We therefore **normalise** by dividing the probability $P(x)$ of the outcome $x$ in $S$ by the probability $P(S')$ of $S'$ in $S$:

$$P(BB|\text{at least one boy})=P(BB|S')=\frac{P(BB)}{P(S')}=\frac{\frac{1}{4}}{\frac{3}{4}}=\frac{1}{3}$$

## Conditioning
Assume now that evens $A$ and $B$ are given.

Assume we know that $B$ happens. So we want to condition on $B$. Thus, we want to know:

$$P(A|B)$$

This is the probability that $A$ occurs given that $B$ is know to occur.

So we want to know the probability $P(A\cap B)$. (as we know that $B$ occurs) after the conditioning on $B$.

We cant take $P(A\cap B)$ itself but have to normalise by dividing by the probability of the new sample space $P(B)$:

$$P(A|B)=\frac{P(A\cap B)}{P(B)}$$

### Formalised
Let $A$ and $B$ be events, with $P(B)>0.

The conditional probability $P(A|B)$ of $A$ given $B$ is given by: 

$$P(A|B)=\frac{P(A\cap B)}{P(B)}$$

View [slide 27](COMP111201119.pdf) for additional example.
{:.info}

## Multiplication Rule
We can rewrite the previous equation like so:

$$P(A\cap B)=P(A|B)P(B)$$

Or like:

$$P(A\cap B)=P(B|A)P(A)$$

This rule can also be extended to more events:

$$P(A\cap B\cap C)=P(C|B\cap A)P(A\cap B)=P(C|A\cap B)P(B|A)P(A)$$

### Example
Consider a family chosen at random from a set of families with just one pair of twins. What is the probability that both twins are boys?

Twins  are either identical $I$ or fraternal $F$. We know that a third of human twins are identical:

$$P(I)=\frac{1}{3},P(F)=\frac{2}{3}$$

and 

$$P(BB)=P(I\cap BB) + P(F\cap BB)$$

By the multiplication rule:

$$P(I\cap BB)= P(BB|I)P(I),\ P(F\cap BB) = P(BB|F)P(F)$$

The probability of being a girl of boy for fraternal twins will be the same as for any other two-child family. For the identical twins, the outcomes $BG$ and $GB$ are no longer possible thus:

$$P(BB|I)=\frac{1}{2},\ P(BB|F)=\frac{1}{4}$$

From this we obtain:

$P(BB)=P(I\cap BB) + P(F\cap BB)$

$=P(BB|I)P(I)+ P(BB|F)P(F)$

$=\frac{1}{2}\times\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{4}\times\frac{2}{3}$

$=\frac{1}{3}$