---
title: Lecture 24-2
tags: COMP105 Lectures
---
## Useful IO Functions
This lecture covers many useful functions included with Haskell. I won't be writing out examples but I will be writing down names and descriptions to search through.

For more detailed examples view [the slides]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/comp105/lectures/2020-12-03-2.pdf) for this lecture.
{:.info}

### `print`
This prints out any `show`-able type.

### `putStr`
This prints a string without adding a new line.

With this you have to manually end the line with:

```haskell
putStr '\n'
```

### `readLn`
This function gets a line of input and then calls `read`. This saves you calling read when getting a line with `getLine`.

To give an explicit type use the syntax:

```haskell
x <- readLn :: IO Int
```

This is due to the fact that when `readLn` is reading the line it is still in the `IO` 'box'.

### `forever`
This repeat an IO action forever. It is in the `Control.Monad` package. This is a higher order IO action as it takes another IO action as an input.

It can be used to make interactive code that runs a function forever.

### `sequence`
This IO action will run a list of IO actions and will return a list containing the return values of the IO actions.

The IO actions must have the same type otherwise they can't be put in the same list.

`sequence` works well with `map`:

```haskell
sequence (map print [1..10])
```

This saves you typing out all the IO actions to `sequence` on.

#### `sequence_`
This IO action is the same as `sequence` but it will return the type `IO ()`. You would want to use this when the IO actions you are running return `IO ()` themselves.

### `mapM`
You can use this map on monads. This is similar to running `sequence` in conjunction with `map`. This is the same as the code from before:

```haskell
mapM print [1..10]
```

#### `mapM_`
This is similar to `sequence_`.

### `when`
This executes an IO action if a condition is true.

```haskell
when True (putStrLn "hi")
```

This is similar to `if` in pure functional code.

### `unless`
This is the opposite of when. It will execute if the condition is **false**.

## Exercises
1. ```haskell
    timesTwo = do
        n <- readLn :: IO Int
        print (n * 2)
    ```

1. ```haskell
    import Control.Monad
    ltFiveOnce = do
        x <- getLine
        when (length x < 5) (putStrLn "yes")
        when (length x >= 5) (putStrLn "no")
    ltFive = forever ltFiveOnce
    ```

1. ```haskell
    addThree = do
    x <- sequence [readLn,readLn,readLn]
    print (sum x)
    ```
    