---
title: COMP105 - Lecture 18-2
tags: COMP105 Lectures
---
## First Past the Post Example
This example covers a first past the post election. This means whoever gets the most votes wins. We are aiming to make a function that performs this task:

```haskell
> winner ["red", "blue", "red", "red", "green"]
> "red"
```

### Getting the Candidates
First we need to figure out who the candidates are:

```haskell
uniq [] = []
uniq (x:xs) = x : uniq (filter (/=x) xs )
```

This function will remove duplicates from a list of strings. For every new element found the filter will remove all further occurrences from the rest of the list before recursing on the list.

### Counting the Votes
This function counts the number of votes for a particular  candidate:

```haskell
count x list = length (filter (==x) list)
```

### Vote Totals
This function will count all the votes for each candidate and put the number of votes and then the candidate in a list of tuples.

```haskell
total votes = 
	let
		candidates = uniq votes
		f = (\\ c -> (count c votes, c))
	in
		map f candidates
```

### Comparing Candidates
Tuples are compared lexicographically. This means that each element is compared in turn to find which satisfies the function.

```haskell
> max (3, "red") (2, "blue")
> (3,"red")
```

This means that if two candidates have the same number then the string is compared.

#### `maximum`
The function `maximum` takes a list and returns the largest item in the list:

```haskell
> maximum [(3, "red"), (2, "blue"), (4, "green")
> (4, "green")
```

### Finding the Winner
`snd` returns the second value in a tuple:

```haskell
winner votes = snd . maximum . totals??????votes
```

Applying this satisfies the requirement:

```haskell
> winner ["red", "blue", "red", "red", "green"]
> "red"
```

## Alternative Vote Example
In the alternative vote system, voters rank the candidates:

* In each round, the candidate with the least number of first preference votes is eliminated.
* The winner is the last candidate left once all other have been eliminated.

```haskell
> let votes = [["red", "blue", "green"],
				["blue", "green"],
				["green", "red"],
				["blue", "red"],
				["red"]]
> av_winner votes
> "red"
```

You don't need many preferences and each list is a single person's preferences.

See [the slides]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/COMP105/Lectures/2020-11-19-2.pdf) for full examples.
{:.info}

### Ranking the Candidates
`sort` sorts all of the items in a list and orders them from smallest to biggest.

### Getting the First Choice Votes
`head` doesn't accept empty lists as input. This should be taken into account when removing items from lists unevenly.

### Final Function
All of the components give this function:

```haskell
av_winner votes =
	let
		ranked = rank_candidates votes
		first = head ranked
	in
		if length ranked == 1
		then first
		else av_winner (remove_cand first votes)
```
