---
title: COMP105 - Lecture 26-1
tags: COMP105 Lectures
---

## Evaluation Strategies

```haskell
inc x = x + 1
square x = x * x
```

So `square (inc 2) = (2 + 1) * (2 + 1) = 9 `. How does Haskell evaluate this?

### Strict Evaluation

In strict evaluation, we always apply the innermost function first:

```haskell
square (inc 2)
	square (3)
	3 * 3
	9
```

Here we first apply `inc` and then apply `square`.

This means that when we call a function we first evaluate its argument.
{:.info}

This is the method that imperative languages use to evaluate functions. Haskell does not evaluate this way
{:.info}

### Lazy Evaluation
In lazy evaluation, we always apply the outermost functions first:

```haskell
square (inc 2)
	inc 2 * inc 2
	3 * 3
	9
```

First apply `square` then apply `inc`.

This method waits as long as possible until computing values.
{:.info}

In the following, nothing is computed until we ask for the value of `z`.

```haskell
> let x = 1 + 1
> let y = x + x
> let z = y / 2
> z
2.0
```

```haskell
> let x = 1 + undefined
> let y = x + x
> let z = y / 2
> z
*** Exception: Prelude.undefined
```

You can see here that the error only occurs when the binding is evaluated.
{:.info}

If a value is never used, it is never computed:

```
> let f x = 1
> f undefined
1
```

You can see here that the argument is not evaluated. This results in the program not crashing due to evaluating `undefined`.

### Imperative Languages

Imperative languages are always strict:

* So programmers know the order of their side effects.

### Functional Languages

For pure functions the order of evaluation is irrelevant.

* You always get the same answer.

* No need to worry about side effects.

Some functional languages are strict by default:

* ML
* Ocaml

Others are lazy by default:

* Haskell

### Lazy vs. Strict

If strict evaluation finds an answer, the lazy evaluation fill find the same answer.

Sometimes lazy evaluation can find an answer when strict evaluation cannot:

```haskell
> fst (1, 1 `div` 0)
1
```

A strict evaluator would crash in this example.

Sometimes lazy evaluation can be more efficient than strict:

* Particularly if some values are computed but never used.

Lazy evaluation only ever computed a value when it is needed. This can lead to big efficiency savings:

* When computing the the head of a doubled list.

## Summary

Strict evaluation:

* Evaluate things as soon as possible.
* Gives certainty over order of side effects.

Lazy evaluation:

* Evaluate things only when they are needed.
* Potentially eliminates unneeded computation.

## Exercise

1. `1`
1. `[5,10,*** Exception: divide by zero`
	
	This is due to the fact that it evaluates last so will print the first two elements. This is opposed to crashing immediately.
	{:.info}
1. `*** Exception: divide by zero`