---
title: COMP105 - Lecture 6-2
tags: COMP105 Lectures
---
## List Comprehensions
List ranges can produce simple arithmetic sequences but list comprehensions can produce more complex lists:

```haskell
> [x*x | x <- [1..10]]
> [1,4,9,16,25,36,49,64,81,100]
```

By using this you can apply a function to a list and put the result into a list.

### Predicates
Predicates also add evaluations into the list to limit the results.

```haskell
> [x*x | x <- 1..10, x*x > 40]
> [49,64,81,100]
```

This limited the output of the previous example to be strictly greater than 40.

Multiple predicates can be separated by multiple commas:

```haskell
> [x*x | x <- 1..10, x*x > 40, x*x < 80]
> [49,64]
```

### In Functions
The body of a function can be a list comprehension:

```haskell
-- This function will print the even values less than a supplied value.

evens_less_than y = [x | x <- [0..(y - 1)], x `mod` 2 == 0]
```

To test each value in a list the following can be applied:

```haskell
-- This function will step through each value in the list `xs`
-- and apply the function.

lts10 xs = [ if x  < 10 then "Yes" else "No" | x <- xs]
```

### Multiple Variables
You can also use more than one sublist in a list comprehension. This will step though every combination of the two lists and print the operation of the lists. This is similar to a nested for loop.

```haskell
> [ x*y | x <- [2,5,10], y <- [8,10,11]]
> [16,20,22,40,50,55,80,100,110]
```

This can also be combined with predicates:

```haskell
> [ x*y | x <- [2,5,10], y <- [8,10,11], x*y > 50]
> [55,80,100,110]
```

Look at the slides for more examples of the topics above. This includes examples for some non-trivial functions such as: Factors of a Value, Prime Numbers up to a Value.
{:.info}

## Lists of Lists
* Lists can contain lists provided that they contain the same type. These lists don't merge but each element in the main list is the sublists:

	```haskell
	[[1,2,3,4],[1,2,3,4]]
	```

* Tuples can also be put in a list provided that they are the same type. This means that the tuples must be:

	* Containing the same type.
	* Of the same length.

	```haskell
	[(1,2,3,4),(1,2,3,4)]
	```

* As a result of the lists containing a list the following happen:

	```haskell
	> let x = [[1,2,3],[4],[5,6]]

	> head x
	> [1,2,3]

	> tail x
	> [[4],[5,6]]

	> length x
	> 3
	```

* As you can have lists of lists you can also nest list comprehensions in lists. An example of this is in the slides.

## List Comprehensions in Other Languages
List comprehensions arose in the functional programming world but they have appeared in imperative languages.

For example in **Python**:

```python
squares = [x**2 for x in range(10)]

[x.lower() for x in ["A","B","C"]]
```

## Exercises
1. ```haskell
	cubesupto x = [y * y * y | y <- [1..x]]
	```

1. ```haskell
	nospaces xs = [x | x <- xs, x /= ' ']
	```
	
1. ```haskell
	allpairs x y = [(a,b) | a <- [1..x], b <- [1..y]]
	```
