---
title: Lecture 23-1
tags: COMP105 Lectures
---
So far, we have studied pure functional programming. Pure functions:

* Have no side effects.
* Always return a value.
* Are deterministic.

All **computation** can be done in pure functional programming.

## IO
Sometimes programs need to do non-pure things:

* Print something to the screen.
* Read or write a file.
* ...

### IO v.s. Pure Functional

```mermaid
graph LR
IO --> p[Pure Functional]
p --> IO
```

* Impure IO code talks to the outside world.
* Pure functional code does the interesting computation.
* IO code can call pure functions; pure functions cannot call IO.

We can call the "functions" that complete IO: IO actions. This is because they are not functions.

### `getLine`
`getLine` read a line of input from the console.

```haskell
> getLine
hello there
"hello there"
```

```haskell
> :t getLine
getLine :: IO String
```

### The `IO` Type
This type marks a value as being impure.

If a function returns an `IO` type then it is impure:

* It may have side effects.
* It may return different values for the same inputs.

The `IO` type should be thought of as a box:

* The box hold a value from an impure computation.
* we can use `<-` to get an impure value from the `IO` type.

```haskell
> x <- getLine
Hello
> x
"Hello"
```

Values must be unboxed before you use them in a pure function.

### `getChar`

This function is similar to `getLine` but returns a single `Char` instead of a string.

### `putStrLn`
This IO action prints a string onto the console.

```haskell
> putStrLn "Hello"
Hello
```

There are no quotation marks as we are seeing this being written to the `StdOut` and not via `read`.

```haskell
> :t putStrLn
putStrLn :: String -> IO ()
```

The unit type has the `IO` type indicating that it has a side effect.

### The Unit Type
The unit type is a type represented by `()`. It only has one value which is itself. 

This is used to indicate that nothing interesting is returned. An example of this is with `putStrLn` where is doesn't return a value but does have the side effect of printing to the `StdOut`.

## Exercise
1. It will ask for two lines. It will then print out the two lines with a space between them back to the `StdOut`.
1. It will read in a line with the expectation that there will be a number on it. It will then convert the line into an `Int` and print out the number `+ 1`.
1. Error due to mismatched types. `putStrLn` expects a `String` but an `IO` type was given.