---
title: Lecture 13-1
tags: COMP105 Lectures
---
## Polymorphic Types
Some functions accept many different types. An example of this is `length` which accepts many different types of lists.

if you ask what the type of then function `length` is then it will return the type:

```haskell
length :: [a] -> Int
```

`a` is a type variable. This means that:

* The function can be applied to any list.
* `a` will represent the type of list elements.

This type is called **polymorphism**. This is a feature of functional languages.

## Type Variables
In the function `head` it will return the type variable which it was given in the list. Hence asking for the type returns:

```haskell
head :: [a] -> a
```

Type variables can appear more than once. These types specify that the return type will be determined by the type of the input.

Multiple type variables can be included in one declaration for example the function `fst` returns the following:

```haskell
fst :: (a,b) -> a
```

As a result the types of function can tell you a lot about what the function does.

## Type Annotations
Is it good practice to insert type annotations for your functions. This is so that Haskell assigns the types to your functions that you expect. You do this with the following syntax.

```haskell
f :: Int -> Int
f x = x + 1
```

The annotation is usually place before the function definition. If you don't give a type annotation, then Haskell will *infer* one for you based on the functions used in your function. This is a result of the language being strongly typed.

Annotating your function can make it easier to catch bugs. This will give the compiler more to work with and make errors more descriptive.

## Exercises
1. `take :: Int -> [a] -> [a]`
1. `(:) :: a -> [a] -> [a]`
1. `(++) :: [a] -> [a] -> [a]`