---
title: Module Introduction
tags: COMP122 Seminars
---
## Recommended Schedule
* Mon-Tue (1-2h)
	* Watch videos, take a quiz, ask discussion questions.
* Tue-Wed (3h)
	* Attend a lab and solve programming exercises.
* Wed (1h)
	* Lecture, Q&A at 1pm.
	
## Contact
Enquiries should be directed to Patrick Totzke at: [totzke@liverpool.ac.uk](mailto:totzke@liverpool.ac.uk).

The professor will also be on [Gather](https://gather.town/app/WS5KuYiNkcxEXmFf/labs) on Wednesdays 2-3pm.

## Introduction to OOP
OOP is based on the idea of interacting object which contain both data and procedures and are an instances of a whole "class" of similar objects.

* Encapsulation
	* Grouping data and code that acts on it into a single unit.
* Abstraction
	* Hiding implementation details from users.
* Inheritance
	* Using known classes of objects as blueprints from more specific ones.
* Polymorphics
	* Different behaviours of subclasses by reconfiguring methods.

### Class Introduction
Suppose that we make a class of `person`. They have **data** associated with them and **methods** they can perform. 

You can have many **instances** of this object with different data.

#### Subclasses
Extending this, a `student` is a `person` with additional data (such as `studentID`)

You can make a subclass that **extends** the original class. This means that you inherit the information from the parent class.

#### Polymorphism
This is the concept that different objects in different subclasses, but in the same superclass, can be addressed in the same way but retrieve different results.

An example of this is a `student` who is `foreign` may respond to a greeting in a different language.
{:.info}