---
title: COMP109
tags: COMP109
---
# Set Operations
## Union
The union of two sets $A$ and $B$ is the set: 
$$A\cup B = \{x\vert x\in A\ \text{or} \in B\}$$

This is the same as logical OR ($+$)

### Example  
Suppose $$A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}$$ 
Then $$A\cup B = \{4,7,8,9,10\}$$

In bit vectors you just perform a logical OR on both of the bit vectors. The result of the OR is the bit vector of the result of the union.

## Intersection
The intersection of two sets $A$ and $B$ is the set:
$$A\cap B = \{x\vert x\in A\ \text{and}\ x\in B\}$$

This is the same as logical AND.

### Example
Suppose $$A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}$$ 
Then $$A\cap B = \{4\}$$

In bit vectors the result of the intersection is the same as a logical AND on the bit vectors.

## Relative Complement
The relative complement of a set $B$ to a set $A$ is the set:
$$A-B=\{x\vert x\in A\ \text{and}\ x\notin B\}$$

This is the same as XOR ($\oplus$)

This is also sometimes called the set difference.
### Example  
Suppose $$A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}$$ 
Then $$A - B = \{7,8\}$$

In bit vectors perform an XOR on both of the bit vectors to get the result.

## Complement
When we are dealing with subsets of some large set $U$, then we call $U$ the universal set fro the problem in question.

The complement of a set $A$ is the set:
$$\sim A=\{x\vert x\notin A\}=U-A$$

This is the same as a binary NOT $\neg$.

### Example
Let $$S=\langle1,2,3,4,5\rangle,\ A=\{1,3,5\}$$
Then $$\sim A = \{2,4\}$$

## The Symmetric Difference
The symmetric differnce of two sets $A$ and $B$ is the set:
$$A\Delta B=\{x\vert (x\in A\ \text{and} x \notin B)\ \text{or}\ (x\notin A\ \text{and} x \notin B)\} $$

This is the same as the logical operator NAND.

### Example  
Suppose $$A=\{4,7,8\},\ B=\{4,9,10\}$$ 
Then $$A - B = \{7,8,9,10\}$$

In bit vectors perform an NAND on both of the bit vectors to get the result.

### Proving the Identity of $A\Delta B=(A\cup B)-(A\cap B)$
#### Proof
Suppose that $x$ is a particular but arbitrarily chosen element. Consider all cases of this element:

##### Case 1
$x\notin A,\ x\notin B$ By definition of $\Delta,\ x\notin A\Delta B$.

By definition of $\cup,\ x\notin A\cup B$.

Hence $(A\cup B)-(A\cap B)$.

##### Case 2
$x\in A,\ x\notin B$ By definition of $\Delta,\ x\in A\Delta B$

By definition of $\cup,\ x\in A\cup B$ as $x\in A$. 

As $x\notin B,\ x\notin A\cap B$. 

So $x\in(A\cup B)-(A\cap B)$.
##### Case 3
$x\notin A,\ x\in B$. This case is symmetric to case 2.

##### Case 4
$x\in A,\ x\in B$ By definition of $\Delta,\ x\notin A\Delta B$.

As $x\in A$, by definition of $\cup,\ x\in A\cup B$.

As $x\in A,\ x\in B,\ x\in A\cap B$.

So $x\notin (A\cup B)-(A\cap B)$.

By the generalisation from the generic particular principle, the identity holds.

(As both sides are equal for all cases the identity must be valid.)