---
title: Noise Filtering
tags: ELEC319 Lectures
---
## Filtering
Filtering is a **neighbourhood** operation:

* The output pixel is a function of neighbourhood pixels.

## Linear Filtering
The output pixel is a linear combination of input pixels.

We use a **mask** that contains weights to be assigned to each pixel:

* The operation is applies to every pixel by sliding the mask.
* The output pixel is the sum of the input pixels multiplied by the weights in the mask.

### Non-Linear Filtering
Anything that is not linear:

* Square mean of neighbourhood pixels.
* Median of neighbourhood pixels.

### Mean Filtering
The idea is to take an average of all $N8$ pixels:

* The filter has equal weights across all pixels in the neighbourhood.

Mean filtering is good to remove Gaussian noise.
{:.success}

The original data of the image is modified.
{:.error}

When averaging pixels on the edges of the image, non-existent pixels are treated as 0.

### Linear Filtering, Cross-Correlation & Convolution
Linear filtering is the same as cross-correlation of two signals.

Convolution is the same as cross-correlation by the kernel is rotated by 180 degrees.

## Median Filtering
This is the same as mean but the median of neighbourhood pixels instead of average.

Requires sorting of $N8$ weighted pixel value.
{:.info}

This is **good** for salt-and-pepper noise and preserves edges.

## Gaussian Filtering
The mask is obtained using the following equation:

$$
G_\sigma=\frac1{2\pi\sigma^2}e^{-\frac{(x^2+y2)}{2\sigma^2}}
$$

we substitute in $(x,y)$ of the mask pixel to find it's value.

The degree of smoothing is controlled by both the mask size and $\sigma$.

This filter produces a good output for use with edge detection algorithms.
{:.info}