---
title: Human Vision
tags: ELEC319 Lectures
---

## Terminology

Field of View
: Total angle covered by the camera in a single image.

Field of Regard
: Total angle that can be covered by the camera in a series of images.

Focal Length (fl)
: Effective distance between lens and focal plane.

Aperture (d)
: Effective size of the lens.

Pixel
: Individual element of the image.

F-number (fl/d)
: Measure of the light allowed through the lens.

Gain-offset Correction
: Control of image exposure (gain) and removal of dark current (offset).

Frame Rate
: Number of frames per second.

Dioptre
: Optical power of a lens (same as $\frac 1 {\text{fl}}$)

## Human Eye
The human eye has two optical components:

* The **cornea** has an optical strength of 31 dioptres.
* The **lens** is only 19 dioptres.

### Rods & Cones

Rods:

* Sensitive to **all types of light**.
* About **100 times** more sensitive to light than the cones.

Cones:

* Concentrated around the centre of the field of view.
* Come in three types:
	* L (Long)
	* M (Medium)
	* S (Short)

Other animal often have limited colour vision due to a differing number of rods and cones.

### Fovea & Saccades
The **fovea** is responsible for what we normally think of a human vision.

* The **high resolution region** of human colour vision is only 2 degrees.

### Stereo Vision
Binocular vision relies on the two eyes having different views of the same scene. 

The distance between the two cameras is called the baseline.

The fact that the two cameras can see different views is called parallax.
{:.info}

Empirical Condition:

$$
\frac{\theta_A-\theta_B}{\theta_\text{FOV}}\times N_\text{Pixels}>1
$$

## Colour
Colour images are composed of three bands: R,G,B

Often it is better to use HSI (Hue, Saturation, Intensity) instead of RGB, as the three colour bands overlap. This causes a change in one band to effect the others.

It is possible to convert from one colour space to another (CMYK to RGB conversion). A formula should be provided if this is required.
{:.info}

## Camera Resolution
Resolution is limited by **pixels** and the **field of view**. 

A field of view of $\theta$ rads with $N$ pixels gives an angular resolution of:

$$
\Delta\theta = \frac\theta N
$$

## Johnson Criteria
This is an empirical experiment that determines the ability to correctly detect and recognise objects.

* **Detection** (with 50% probability) = resolve 1 bar.
* **Recognition** (with 50% probability) = resolve 3 bar.
* **Identification** (with 50% probability) = resolve 5 bar.

1 bar is a minimum of 3 pixels.
{:.info}

## Optical Effects

Vignetting
: The shadowing of the corners of an image from the optical aperture (the effect of the finite focal length). 

Optical Distortion
: This is the effect of imperfect lenses. **Barrel** distortion expands towards the centre. **Chromatic** distortion presents itself as a prism effect.

Image Noise
: Non-uniform response to stimulus across the focal plane.

Blooming
: Where high intensity pixels leak into neighbours.