---
title: Image Enhancement
tags: ELEC319 Lectures
---
## Gain-Offset Correction
This determines the contrast in an image. We may have to re-scale images in a video to ensure all images in a sequence have similar brightness and contrast.

This correction fixes two issues of image sensors:

* Gain - A multiplicative error in the output.
* Offset - An additive error in the output.

## Scaling & Equalisation

Scaling and equalisation clips and distorts the raw image data to produce a more appealing image. This can reduce the information in the final image. The following methods can be used:

* Histogram Equalisation - Aims to improve apparent contrast.
* Rescales the intensities so that the intensity distribution is near uniform.

### Intensity Transforms
Given an image histogram:

* $r$ is the original grey level (between 0 and $L-1$).
* $s$ is the transformed output grey level (also between 0 and $L-1$).

#### Contrast Stretching
This method is for enhancing images with little contrast.

Given that the detail is given between $r_a$ and $r_b$:

* Reduce the dynamic range before and after the range $r_a$ to $r_b$.
* Increase the contrast in the range $r_a$ to $r_b$ to fill the histogram.
#### Intensity Level Slicing
This method can be used to enhance features within an image.

Given that the detail is given between $r_a$ and $r_b$:

* Set all pixels in the range to a fixed (brighter) value.

## Bit-Plane Slicing
Bit plane slicing is used to separate out useful information within an image:

* In an $n$-bit image, each pixel has $n$ bits and there are $n$ planes.
* The MSB contains the majority of the visually significant data.
* The LSB is essentially noise.

## Histogram Stretching
For an ideal image, the image histogram is flat. We can perform histogram stretching to spread a peak to fill the histogram:

* Assume that a histogram of a low contrast image ranges from grey value $\check g$ to $\hat g$.
* Assume that we wish to spread this to $[0,G-1]$.
	* where $G-1>\hat g-\check g$.
	
We can do this transform with the following function:

$$
g'=\left\lfloor\frac{g-\check g}{\hat g-\check g}G+\frac12\right\rfloor
$$

This simple method only stretches the whole histogram. The process of flattening an image histogram is called **histogram equalisation**.
{:.warning}