---
title: Shapes & Connectivity
tags: ELEC319 Lectures
---
## Pixels, Neighbours & Connectivity

$N_4$ Connectivity
: Each pixel has 4 pixels directly around it.

$N_8$ Connectivity
: This includes diagonally adjacent pixels, so all pixels surrounding a pixel.

### Structuring Element
This is a mask that can be used to define pixel neighbours:

* It is a small matrix of odd index.
* `1`s in the matrix define pixels that are neighbours.

This type of structuring element is called **flat**.
{:.info}

* SEs don't have to be square.
* SEs don't have to be symmetrical.
* Non-flat SEs contain values that are non-binary.

#### Structuring Element Uses
They are used to **probe** large images for specific shapes:

* Therefore you should choose a SEs template to match the shape you want to find in the main image.

The size of the SE determines the **detection scale**:

* Smaller SE size, will discover more small features.

### Distance Between Two Pixels
Given two pixels $p=(x_1,y_1)$ and $p_2(x_2,y_2)$:

* Chessboard distance:

	$$
	\max(\lvert x_1-x_2\rvert, \lvert y_1-y_2\rvert)
	$$
	

* Cityblock Distance (Manhattan Distance):

	$$
	\lvert x_1-x_2\rvert+\lvert y_1-y_2\rvert
	$$

	This assumes 8-connectivity.
	{:.info}

* Euclidean Distance

	$$
	\sqrt{(x_1-x_2)^2(y_1-y_2)^2}
	$$

#### Distance Transform
For this transform we calculate:

* The distance between each pixel **not** in the SE mask and the nearest pixel in the mask.

## Connected Component Labelling
This is also known as region extraction. The idea is to:

1. **Group** pixels into components based on **pixel connectivity**.
	* All pixels in a connected component share the same pixel intensity.
	* This could be $N_4$ or $N_8$.
1. **Label** each pixel with a colour or greyscale.

### Two-Pass Equivalence Class Resolution
This is a two-pass algorithm:

1. Scan the image (row-wise or column-wise), one pixel at a time:
	1. When encountering a foreground pixel, look at the previously scanned, neighbour pixels (with 8-connectivity):
		* If any of the neighbours have a label assigned, assign the same label to the pixel.
		* If neighbouring pixels have more than one labels assigned, pick one arbitrarily.
		* Otherwise, assign a new label.
	1. Every time a label is added, add that label to the **equivalence table** as a new row.
	1. If two neighbouring pixels represent the same region, add them to the same row.
	1. Continue until all pixels are covered.
1. Assign new labels for the rows of the equivalence table:
	1. Scan the image pixel-by-pixel again, new labels to consolidate existing labels.

## Shapes
A shape is an image region that can be defined using a set of finite boundary points.

### Geometrical Features
The geometry of a region can be characterised in many ways:

Area
: The number of pixels covered by the region.

Centroid
: The position of the geometrical centre of the region

Major/Minor Axis
: The length of the major/minor axis of an ellipse that has the same second moments as the region.

Eccentricity
: The eccentricity of the ellipse is the ratio of the distance between the foci of the ellipse and its major axis.

Orientation
: The orientation of the ellipse.

Euler Number
: The number of holes within the region

Inscribed Radius
: The radius of the largest cirlce that is contained by the region

Circumscribed Radius
: The radius of the smallest circle that contains the region.

Some features that are dependent of a regions **distribution of intensity** are:

Centre of Mass
: The position of the centre of the region.
	
	* Weighted by the intensities of the pixels.
	* Often the centre of mass's displacement from the centroid is of interest.
	
Image Moments (Statistical)
: Mean, variance, skewness.

We can define types of shapes by using correlations between these features.
{:.info}