---
title: COMP107
tags: COMP107
---
# Lecture 1 - 12/10/20
## Staff List
* Floriana Grasso
	* Module leader
* Alexis Nolan-Webster
	* Employability officer
* A number of graduate teaching assistants
	* Co-ordinate tutorials
* Guest Speakers

## Aims
* To provide the students with a wide-rage understanding of the discipline of computing, and to introduce students to concepts of professional ethics as well as social and legal aspects of computing.
* To equip the students with communication, time and project management, and employability skills requires for a computing professional.
* To allow the students to gain an understanding of the importance of appropriate and efficient system design strategies, at the conceptual and logical levels.

## Progression Routes
* COMP107
	* COMP207 - DB Development
	* COMP283 - Applied DB Management
	* COMP201 - Software Engineering
	* COMP208 - Group Project
	* COMP221 - Plan Career
		* Aimed at year in industry students
	* COMP228 - App Development
	* COMP390 - Final Year Project

## Assesment
* No Examinations
* Four tasks, all worth 25% - No programming is involved but just the planning and development phase.
	* Group projects
		* Assignment 1 - Imagine your dream information system.
		* Assignment 2 - Design the system formally.
		* Assignment 3 - Pitching the system.
	* Individual task throughout the module.
		* Assignment 4 - Building your professional identity.
* Deadlines
	* Assignment 1 - 4
	* Assignment 2 - 8
	* Assignment 3 - Peer Assessed on 11
	* Assignment 4 - Continuous Assessment
	
## Structure
* Lectures - All pre-recorded clips
* Live seminars - Catch-up session once per week on Monday
* Tutorials - On canvas
