---
title: C# Design Patterns (MVC, Factory & Decorator)
tags: COMP282 Lectures
---
## Model-View-Controller
This is a design pattern that splits a user interface into three parts:

* Model - The internal state and data of the application.
* View - The GUI elements and how they appear to the user.
* Controller - Create events that modify the internal state of the application.

### MVC Advantages

* Different parts can be done by different people.
* High cohesion.
* Low coupling
* Easier to maintain.
* Greater code reuse.

### MVC Disadvantages

* Mode code and higher levels of abstraction.
* Easier to forget to do a part because the parts are at different places.

## Factories
Consider that you have a set of classes and you want to create one depending on an input.

* We have a set of animal classes and want to create an animal.

We can use the following as a solution:

1. Give the classes a common interface.
1. Create a new class named `<ClassName>Factory`.
1. This class has a single method, `get<ClassName>()`, that takes a class and produces a new instance of that class.

## Decorators
This pattern can solve the following problems:

* You want to add a responsibility to an object at run time.
* You want to do sub-classes but with multiple choice.

We can use the following as a solution:

1. Create an interface for the class `<ClassName>` and call it `I<Classname>`.
1. Create an `<ClassName>Decorator` class, implementing `I<ClassName>` and having an `I<ClassName>` field.
1. The constructor takes an `I<ClassName>` element and puts it into the field.
1. All methods are just called on that field.
1. We can then create subclasses of `<ClassName>Decorator` that will overwrite methods and then do some operations before calling methods on the field.

We can implement this in the following example:

1. Consider that we are making a text editor that has a `Text` object. We can implement an `IText` interface that allows us to define a `draw` method.
1. We can make a class `TextDecorator` that implements `IText` with an `IText` field.
1. `TextDecorator` has an `IText` field and takes `IText` in the constructor.
1. We can then create subclasses of `TextDecorator` and use them like so:

	```cs
	TextFirst(new TextUpper(text));
	```

## Rule of Three
This rule states that we should **wait until we have three** of something before we **generalise** using a design pattern.

* This saves us putting in extra effort in generalising when we have no need, or too many classes.