---
title: Numeric Testing
tags: COMP285 Lectures
---

To test numeric functions we should use cases like so:

```
| Fcalc(x) - Ftrue(x) | < tolerance
```

We can calculate `Ftrue` using an arbitrary precision maths package.
{:.info}

This is as there are inherent losses with floating point numbers so our calculated value may be off (within reason).

## Tolerance
We can calculate the tolerance with the following function:

$$
\text{Tolerance} \leq \text{Cn}(x) \times \text{ULP}
$$

Where:

* $\text{ULP}$ - **Unit of least precision** which is dependant on the data type used.
* $\text{Cn}(x)$ - **Function of the condition number** where the greater the condition number, the greater the effect of loss in precision.

## Types of Function Test
### Golden Value
These are particular values which are proven mathematically such as:

* $\sin(\pi) = 0$
* $\log(1) = 0$

We can test these using the tolerance calculation above.

### Identities
This is a case where we use **multiple functions** in conjunction to produce an output:

$$
\sin(x)^2+\cos(x)^2=1
$$

Using identities may hide **compensated error** (where the functions are equally wrong in the opposite direction).
{:.warning}

### Inverse Function Tests
These are similar to identities:

$$
x = (\sqrt x)^2
$$

Unlike identities, they test for **accuracy** as in the previous example - $\sin(x)=1$ and $\cos(x)=0$, while still passing the test.

## Binary Number Represenatations
### 8-bit Float
Consider that we are storing a decimal number in an 8-bit float:

<table style="text-align: center">
<tbody><tr>
<th width="12.5%">sign
</th>
<th colspan="4" width="50%">exponent
</th>
<th colspan="3" width="37.5%">significand
</th></tr>
<tr>
<td style="background: #d5ffff">0
</td>
<td style="background: #a4ffb4">0
</td>
<td style="background: #a4ffb4">0
</td>
<td style="background: #a4ffb4">0
</td>
<td style="background: #a4ffb4">0
</td>
<td style="background: #ffb2b4">0
</td>
<td style="background: #ffb2b4">0
</td>
<td style="background: #ffb2b4">0
</td></tr></tbody></table>

We can calculate the error when storing `0.1`:

```
0 1111 001
```

This is stored perfectly.
{:.info}

Or calculate the error when storing `0.25`:

```
0 1111 011
```

We cannot store 25 in the 3 bit significand so the closes digit is 3. This gives an error of 0.05.
{:.info}

### Fixed Point Binary
We can also use a fixed point representation like so:

| $2^2$ | $2^1$ | $2^0$ | $2^{-1}$ | $2^{-2}$ | $2^{-3}$ | $2^{-4}$ | $2^{-5}$ |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0|

This can also be written as:

$$
1101\ .\ 0011_2
$$

We can calculate the error of storing 0.1 in 8 bits:

$$
0\ .\ 0001\ 1010_2 = 0.1015625
$$

We have to round to fit this in 8 bits.
{:.info}

$$
\vert0.1 - 0.1015625\vert = 1.5625{\times}10^{-3}
$$

#### Rounding in Binary

* If the next digit is 0 then round down (store as truncated).
* If the next digit is 1 then round up.