---
title: Testing Principles - Types of Testing & Bug Reports
tags: COMP285 Lectures
---
## Orthogonal Testing
This is where each range of data (not every combination of data) is tested. We are trying to test only a single attribute at a time.

### Modes of Error
The mode of an error is how many parts of a function have errors in them. Consider that we have the following function that counts the days until a certain date:

```java
countDaysTill(int day, int month, int year)
```

We could have bugs appear when we check different variables of the input:

* Bug in `year` - Single Mode Fault
* Buy in `day` and `year` - Double Mode Fault

Exhaustive testing of some single mode faults is sometimes possible.
{:.info}

### Visualising Orthogonal Testing
When there is a large amount of data to test we can visualise this as a 3D graph (for 3 variables). We can then use this to see where the errors occur on the input.

## Statistical Testing
This is where we give a random input to the program and see if the results are correct. 

This can be a good method when there are so many inputs that you can't do other methods of testing.
{:.info}

### Statistical Testing Example
Consider that a bug effects 0.01% of positions, evenly distributed, and we test 10,000 positions randomly. What is the chance that we miss the bug?

1. The chance of passing the bug for each test is:

	$$
	1-(0.0001)=0.9999
	$$
1. Therefore the change of not finding the bug is:
	
	$$
	0.9999^{10000}=0.36=36\%
	$$
	
We can also work this backwards, with logs, to find the **defect density**.
{:.info}

## Testing with Identities
To ensure that we don't have **buggy tests** we can test with **identities** like so:

$$
\sqrt x \times \sqrt x = x
$$

We can do this to ensure that our tests are as simple as possible.

## Coding by Contract
This is the practice of **constraining the input** of a method:

* You can do this by throwing an exception if the input is outside the range.
* You can use this to reduce the amount of tests that you do.

We may want to use **validation testing** to ensure that exceptions are produced when they are supposed to.
{:.info}

## Generating Useful Bug Reports
We should always include the following information so that our bug reports are useful:

* Date, Product Name, Platform
* Description
* Logs
* Version of Software
* How to recreate the bug.