---
title: Programming Methodologies
tags: COMP285 Lectures
---
Software development methodologies are a collection of procedures, techniques, principles and tools that help developers to build computer systems. 

## Traditional Methodologies
The main traditional approaches are:

* Monumental
* Waterfall

These methodologies are very **rigid**:

* First complete a functional specification.
* Then the software is developed in several distinct, waterfall-like phases. 

This has the following **issues**:

* Difficult to adapt to changing customer requirements.
* Design errors are:
	* Hard to detect.
	* Expensive to correct.
	
For more notes on the [waterfall model]({{site.baseurl}}/lectures/2021/09/28/1.html#waterfall-model) see the link.
{:.info}

## Agile Methodologies
Agility in software development means:

* Adaptability
* Ability to respond quickly to change in the environment.
* Eliminate surprises from changed requirements.
* Risk Reduction
* Less chance of validation errors.

Emphasises an **iterative** process:

* Build some well-defined set of features.
* Repeat with another set of features.

Value **customer feedback**:

* Quick feedback.
* Sometimes with a client on-site.

**Code-centric**:

* Recognise the value in **documentation** and **modelling**.
	* Realise that it is not as important ast the software itself.
	
	We can do this my developing **self-documenting** code with; long meaningful names, comments and todo notes.
	
### Testing in Agile
The only way to validate software is through testing. Testing can be:

* **Functional** - Specific yes or no tests based on the functional specification.
* **Non-functional** - Stress testing, usability and security testing.

### SCRUM
This is an agile approach where:

* Each **iteration** of software development called a **sprint**.
* Each sprint delivers **working code** or a **partial product**. 
* Each phase requires a **set of tests**.
* Testing is **integrated**.

There are a few phases:

1. Specification
1. Development which can be:
	* Specification
	* Design
	* Coding
1. Each iteration tests:
	* New functions
	* All old functions for **regression**.
1. Testing is extensive bu shouldn't be burdensome:
	* Automated testing is ideal.
	
### Test Driven Development
This is putting testing **first** on the development process:

* **Before implementing** a piece of code, such as a Java method, **start by writing down a test** which this method should pass.
* The test is like a goal.
* First state a goal, the do the steps to acheive that goal.

Goals can be:

* Small
* Intermediate
* Final

Tests should be written first so that it is based wholly on the specification and no assumptions are made.
{:.info}

### eXtreme Programming
This method has the following **essential practices**:

1. Testing
	* How will you know if feature works if you don't test.
	* How do you know if a feature still works after you refactor.
	* Should be **automated**.
	* Everything that can break must have a test.
1. Continuous Integration
	* Means building and testing a complete copy of the system several times per day.
	* This can take a significant amount of time if left until the end of the project.
1. Refactoring
	* This is a **technique for** restructuring the internal structure of the code **without** changing its **external behaviour** but **adding new features**.
	* Enables developers to add features while **keeping the code simple**.
	* Each refactoring transformation **does little** so less is likely to go wrong.
	* **Relies on testing** to ensure you don't break anything.
1. Planning Game
	* Discussing the scope of the current iteration and priority of features.
1. 40-hour Work Week
1. Small Releases
1. Simple Design
1. Pair Programming
	* A **driver** writes the code and an **observer** reviews the code.
1. Collective Ownership
	* No crucial dependence on one developer.
1. On-Site Customer
1. Metaphor
	* A common language for developers and customers.
1. Coding Standards
	* Everyone writes code in the same standard to keep it clean and help legibility. 
	
### Common Principles

**KISS**:

* Keep it simple stupid!

**YAGNI**:

* You ain't' gonna need it
* So don't:
	* Add functions not in the specification.
	* Add too much future proofing.
	
These principles may discourage code flexibility and re-use.
{:.warning}

### Issues of Agile Methodologies
One issue with allowing the requirements to change is that:

* It is hard to develop a schedule.
