---
title: Continuous Integration & Automated Testing
tags: COMP285 Lectures
---
## Automated Testing
Automated testing is important as it allows us to easily test code quickly and repeatedly.

### Unit Testing
This usually exercise all the methods in the **public interface** of an **isolated**, **independent** class.

* This verifies that a **unit of code** behaves as expected.

There is **no strict definition** for a unit, however it could be:

* A method in a class working in isolation.
* A flow of control when calling a method which covers a given set of paths.
	* This is what you would use the cyclomatic count for.
* A class.

In object oriented programs, the unit test should be at least 1 class in isolation.
{:.info}

In Java you can use **JUnit** to write unit tests.

### Integration Testing
Integration testing ensures that multiple units produce the correct output when they are **working together**.

You can also use **JUnit** to write integration tests.
{:.info}

### Functional Testing
This ensures that the **whole system** behaves as expected. 

This can also be called **acceptance testing**, to verify, for the customer, that the system is complete.
{:.info}

There is **no universal acceptance testing tool** as it depends heavily on what system you are developing.

#### Web Testing Frameworks
These are functional testing tools, specifically for web interfaces. You can:

* Make requests to an external website.
* Inspect the responses to ensure that they are correct.

There are several web testing frameworks:

* HTTPUnit
	* Low level, simplistic, web API.
	* Poor JavaScript support.
* HTMLUnit
	* Better JavaScript support.
	* Better document level support.
* JWebUnit
	* A wrapper for HTMLUnit and Selenium.

These testing frameworks have the following **issues**:

* Can't check if the web page actually works for the user.
* Limit on JavaScript testing.
* Does not test browser compatibility.
	
	This seems a bit silly.
	{:.info}

### Performance Testing
There are two main performance testing frameworks for Java:

* JUnitPerf:
	* Does unit performance testing.
	* It decorates existing JUnit tests so that they fail if running times are exceeded. 
* JMeter:
	* Provides functional performance testing:
		* Can measure web server response times.
	* Is site agnostic.
	* Can't run JavaScript.
	
## Continuous Integration
This is the automatic process of building the complete system for ever commit. This has the **advantages** of:

* Allows the customer and test to see the progress.
* Integration bugs are reduced.
* Tests are run frequently.
* Reduces integration pain by doing it all the time.

### Ant
Ant is a build tool for Java that makes:

* Building 
* Environment Customisation
* Testing
* Deployment

possible in a **single** command that can be automated.