---
title: COMP116 - Quaternions and 3D Graphics
tags: COMP116 Lectures
---
How to we extend the complex plane to 3D? We do this by considering vector algebra with four components.

## Quaternion Structure
Complex numbers can be written as 2-vectors &#92;(\langle x,y\rangle&#92;).

Quaternions use points in &#92;(\Bbb R^4&#92;) (all values are real) of the form:

&#92;[q=(w,x,y,z)&#92;]

Matching &#92;(z=x+iy&#92;) we now have:

&#92;[q=w+ix+jy+kz&#92;]

Where:
&#92;[
i^2=j^2=k^2=-1
&#92;]

And:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
jk&=-kj=i&#92;&#92;
ki&=-ik=j&#92;&#92;
ij&=-ji=k
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

## Notation

* &#92;(\Bbb H&#92;) - The set of all quaternions.

	The notation &#92;(\Bbb H&#92;) is in honour of William Hamilton
	{:.info}
* &#92;(q\in\Bbb H&#92;) - An arbitrary quaternion.
* The forms &#92;(q=w+ix+jy+kz&#92;) and &#92;(q[\alpha,\vec v]&#92;) are both used.
	*	In the second of these &#92;(w\equiv \alpha \in \Bbb R;&#92;) &#92;(\vec v=\langle x,y,.z\rangle\in\Bbb R^3&#92;)
	
		The vector &#92;(\vec v&#92;) is a 3-vector in &#92;(\Bbb R&#92;).
		{:.info}

## Operations

* Addition
	* Add the corresponding components.
* Scalar Multiplication by &#92;(\alpha\in\Bbb R&#92;)
	* Multiply individual components by &#92;(\alpha&#92;).
* Conjugate
	* If &#92;(q=(w,x,y,z)&#92;), &#92;(\bar q=(w,-x,-y,-z)&#92;)
	* If &#92;(q=[\alpha,\vec v]&#92;), &#92;(\bar q=[\alpha,-\vec v]&#92;)
* Modulus
	* &#92;(\vert\vert(w,x,y,z)\vert\vert=\sqrt{w^2+x^2+y^2+z^2}&#92;)
	* Equivalently &#92;(\vert\vert[\alpha,\vec v]\vert\vert=\sqrt{\alpha^2+\vert\vert\vec v\vert\vert^2}&#92;)
	* If &#92;(\vert\vert q\vert\vert=1&#92;), &#92;(q&#92;) is called a **unit quaternion**.
* Division
	* &#92;(q^{-1}=\frac{\bar q}{\vert\vert q\vert\vert^2}&#92;)
	
### Multiplication
For two arbitrary quaternions &#92;(s,t\in\Bbb H&#92;) how do we form their product?

Expanding brackets is complicated and tedious. Consider this form, for &#92;(s=[\alpha,\vec u]&#92;) and &#92;(t=[\beta,\vec v]&#92;), &#92;(s\times t=&#92;):

&#92;[[\alpha\beta-\vec u\cdot\vec v,\alpha\vec v+\beta\vec u+\vec u\times\vec v]&#92;]

Pay attention to the dot product and the cross product.
{:.info}

Quaternion product is **not commutative** (&#92;(s\cdot t\neq t\cdot s&#92;))
{:.error}

## 3D Graphics
Matrix-vector products don't work well for rotation in 3D. Additionally they are computationally expensive.

### Gimbal Lock
This phenomenon occurs when using matrix-vectors for 3D graphics. This is because you may ask for undefined values of trig functions. This will occur in errors.

Quaternions do not suffer from these errors.

### Rotation with Quaternions
Suppose we are looking to rotate a point &#92;((x,y,z)&#92;) about some **axis of rotation** (an infinite line in 3D) &#92;(\vec v=\langle \alpha,\beta,\gamma\rangle&#92;).

We wish to rotate through some angle &#92;(\theta\degree&#92;).

1. Choose the quaternion &#92;(q_\theta=[\cos(\frac{\theta}{2}),\sin(\frac{\theta}{2})\vec v]&#92;)

	Since we are dealing with a line we can **always** choose &#92;(\vec v&#92;) so that &#92;(q_\theta&#92;) is a **unit quaternion**.
	{:.info}
1. The computation "rotate &#92;(\vec w=\langle x,y,z\rangle&#92;) by &#92;(\theta\degree&#92;) about &#92;(\vec v&#92;)" is just the quaternion product:

	&#92;[q_\theta\cdot[0,\vec w]\cdot q_\theta^{-1}=q_\theta^{-1}\cdot[0,\vec w]\cdot q_\theta&#92;]
