---
title: COMP116 - Vectors & Vector Operations
tags: COMP116 Lectures
---

## &#92;(n&#92;)-vectors

* A set of numbers, &#92;(H&#92;).

	* &#92;(H&#92;) is one of: &#92;(\Bbb{N,W,Z,Q;R}&#92;).
* A *natural* number, &#92;(n\in\Bbb{N}&#92;).
* An &#92;(n&#92;)-vector over &#92;(H&#92;), has &#92;(n&#92;) components:
	&#92;[\underline x = \langle x_1,x_2,\ldots,x_n\rangle&#92;]
* Each &#92;(x_k\in H&#92;).

This is *not a  set*: we cam have &#92;(x_s=x_t&#92;) and &#92;(s\neq t&#92;).
{:.error}

* The order of components matters: &#92;(\langle 1,2,1\rangle\neq\langle1,1,2\rangle&#92;).

## Notation & Operands

In the presentation the lecturer will use the following notation:

* Arbitrary vectors: &#92;(\mathbf{\underline x,\underline y, \underline u, \underline v; \underline w}&#92;).
* Writing vectors in full: &#92;(\langle u_1,u_2,\ldots,u_m\rangle&#92;).
* For points we use: &#92;((u_1,u_2,\ldots,u_m)&#92;).

As this notation for arbitrary vectors is tedious to type the following will be used:

* Arbitrary vectors: &#92;(\vec x, \vec y,\vec u,\vec v, \vec w&#92;).

### Operations

* Addition: &#92;(+&#92;)
* Scalar multiple: &#92;(*&#92;)
* Size or norm: &#92;(\Vert u\Vert&#92;) or &#92;(\Vert u\Vert_2&#92;)
* Product: &#92;(\cdot&#92;) or &#92;(\times&#92;)
	* You can use: &#92;(u\cdot v=\Vert u\Vert \Vert v\Vert cos\theta&#92;).

Given &#92;(n&#92;)-vectors: &#92;(\vec u,\vec v,\vec w&#92;) etc. and a constant &#92;(\alpha\in H&#92;).

* Addition
	* &#92;(\vec w=\vec u+\vec v&#92;)
	* &#92;(w_k+v_k\forall k1\leq k\leq n&#92;)
		This is to say that if you want to add two vectors they need to have the same number of components.
		{:.info}

* Scalar Multiple

	* &#92;(\vec w=\alpha\vec u&#92;)

	* &#92;(w_k=\alpha u_k\forall k1\leq k\leq n&#92;)

		This means that you just times all the components by the scalar.

* Norm

	* &#92;(\Vert u\Vert=\sqrt{\sum^n&#95;&#123;k=1}\vert u_k\vert^2}&#92;)

		This is just the Pythagorean theorem.

* Product 

	* Definition is not given.

## Attributes

*  A vector &#92;(\vec u&#92;) has a size &#92;(\Vert u\Vert&#92;) and a direction.
* A vector doesn't not have a position.
* The operation can be interpreted geometrically.

* The length of a vector resulting from adding two vectors may be written in terms of basic trigonometric relations.

## Dot Product

For two vectors, their dot product is the cosine of the angle between them. This gives the following cases:

* Right angles give a dot product of 0.
* Parallel vectors give a dot product of -1.
	* Position doesn't matter and thus the direction doesn't change this value.

## Special Vectors

* The zero vector &#92;(\vec 0&#92;):
	* All values are zero.
* The basis vector &#92;(e_k&#92;):
	* All components are zero except the &#92;(k^{th}&#92;) which is equal to 1.
	* There are &#92;(n&#92;) basis vectors, one for each &#92;(k&#92;).

* Unit vectors:
	* Those whose magnitude is 1.
* Orthogonal vectors:
	* At right angles, whose dot product is 0.

