---
title: Partial Derivatives & Multi-variable Functions
tags: COMP116 Lectures
---
Consider a function such as:

$$z=-(3x^2+2y^2+xy)$$

What are the values of $x$ and $y$ which maximise $z$?

Are there any such values?

## Partial Derivatives
For the prior function:

1. We need values of $x$ and $y$ which maximise $z$.
1. We know $x$ to maximise $z$ when $y$ is fixed.
1. We know $y$ to maximise $z$ when $x$ is fixed.
1. But we want to do things simultaneously.
1. Assume that $y$ is fixed and find the "right" $x$.
1. Assume that $x$ is fixed and find the "right" $y$.

From this we can make a set of simultaneous equations to solve.

### Example

For $z=-(3x^2+2y^2+xy)$.

1. Differentiate as if $y$ was a constant:
	
	$$f_x(x,y)=-(6x+y)$$
	
1. Differentiate $f(x,y)$ as if $x$ was a constant.

	$$f_y(x,y)=-(4y+x)$$
	
1. Find the values of $x,y$ for which $f_x(x,y)=0,$  $f_y(x,y)=0$ by solving the simultaneous equations.

## Notation
For functions of two variables ($z=f(x,y)$) we have:

* $f_x(x,y)$ - The first partial derivative of $f(x,y)$ with respect to $x$.
* $f_y(x,y)$ - The first partial derivative of $f(x,y)$ with respect to $y$.

Also used are:

$$\frac{\partial z}{\partial x}; \frac{\partial z}{\partial y}$$

For a function of $n$ variables:

$$z = f(x_1,x_2,\ldots,x_k,\ldots,x_n)$$

this style of notation will be used:

$$\frac{\partial z}{\partial x_k}$$

## Example Continued
From the prior example the two simultaneous equations were:

$$
\begin{aligned}
-6x-y&=0\\
-x-4y&=0
\end{aligned}
$$

The only solution is: $x=0, y=0$.

Therefore, this function is **critical** at the point $(0,0)$.

To test if this is maximum we need an analogue of the **second derivative** test.

## Second Derivative Test with 2 Variables

1. With **2 variables** there are **4 possible** forms of the second order partial derivative.
1. With $n$ variables there are $n^2$.

How do we combine these? 

The 4 forms: $(f_{xx},f_{xy},f_{yx},f_{yy})$ or:

$$\frac{\partial^2z}{\partial x^2},\frac{\partial^2z}{\partial x\partial y},\frac{\partial^2z}{\partial y\partial x},\frac{\partial^2z}{\partial y^2}$$

### Interpretation of Notation
* $f_{xx}$ - The partial derivative of $f_x$ with respect to $x$.
* $f_{xy}$ - The partial derivative of $f_y$ with respect to $x$.

For $f(x,y)=-(3x^2+2y^2+xy)$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
f_{xx}&=-6\\
f_{xy}&=-1\\
f_{yx}&=-1\\
f_{yy}&=-4
\end{aligned}
$$

In general $f_{xy}$ and $f_{yx}$ are **identical functions**.
{:.info}

### Using the Test
There is a **precondition**:

$$(f_{xx}f_{yy}-(f_{xy})^2)(\alpha, \beta)>0$$

* If $f_{xx}(\alpha, \beta)>0$ the point is a **minimum**.
* If $f_{xx}(\alpha, \beta)<0$ the point is a **maximum**.
* If $f_{xx}(\alpha, \beta)=0$ no conclusion can be made.

Where $(\alpha, \beta)$ is the critical point.
{:.info}