---
title: COMP116 - Complex Valued Functions - 1 (Differential Calculus)
tags: COMP116 Lectures
---
The main issue with complex numbers is that they **cannot be ordered**.

These issues mainly effect the following class of functions:

&#92;[f:\Bbb C \rightarrow \Bbb C&#92;]

## Functions with Real Domain & Complex Range
The special case &#92;(f:\Bbb R\rightarrow \Bbb C&#92;) is fairly straightforward since &#92;(f(x)&#92;) is two rel valed functions:

&#92;[f&#95;&#123;\text{Re}}:\Bbb R\rightarrow \Bbb R;f&#95;&#123;\text{Im}}:\Bbb R\rightarrow \Bbb R&#92;]

So that:

&#92;[f(x)=f&#95;&#123;\text{Re}}(x)+if&#95;&#123;\text{Im}}(x)&#92;]

Therefore the first derivative is represented by the following:

&#92;[f'(x)=f'&#95;&#123;\text{Re}}(x)+if'&#95;&#123;\text{Im}}(x)&#92;]

Integration would give a similar equation:

&#92;[\int^q_p f(x)dx=\int^q_p f&#95;&#123;\text{Re}}(x)dx+i\int^q_p f&#95;&#123;\text{Im}}(x)dx&#92;]

## Functions with Complex Domain & Range
When &#92;(f:\Bbb C\rightarrow \Bbb C&#92;) more care is needed.

Consider &#92;(f(z)&#92;) where &#92;(z=p+iq&#92;)

We have real valued functions &#92;(u(p,q)&#92;) and &#92;(v(p,q)&#92;):

&#92;[f(z)=f(p+iq)\equiv f(p,q)=u(p,q)+iv(p,q)&#92;]

So we have a function of two real variables mapping to two real-valued functions of two real variables.
{:.info}

This suggest applying partial derivatives.

### Cauchy-Reimann Conditions
In order for &#92;(f'(z)&#92;) to be sensibly defined bia partial derivatives we respect to &#92;(\text{Re}(z)&#92;) and &#92;(\text{Im}(z)&#92;) of &#92;(\text{Re}\left(f(z)\right)&#92;) and &#92;(\text{Im}\left(f(z)\right)&#92;) (the 2 variable functions &#92;(u(p,q)&#92;) and &#92;(v(p,q)&#92;) of the previous slide) there are some important preconditions that &#92;(u(p,q)&#92;) and &#92;(v(p,q)&#92;) have to satisfy.

There are called the Cauchy-Riemann conditions:

&#92;[\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}=\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}&#92;]

&#92;[\frac{\partial u}{\partial q}=-\frac{\partial v}{\partial p}&#92;]

These are conditions on functions.

These conditions say that it doesn't matter that there are many ways of approaching zero as they are all equivalent.
{:.info}

## Example
For &#92;(f(z)=z^2&#92;) where &#92;(z=p+iq&#92;). We have:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
u(p,q)&=\text{Re}\left(f(z)\right)&=\text{Re}\left((p+iq)^2\right)&=p^2-q^2&#92;&#92;
v(p,q)&=\text{Im}\left(f(z)\right)&=\text{Im}\left((p+iq)^2\right)&=2pq
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

Lets apply the first Cauchy-Reimann condition:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}&=2p&#92;&#92;
\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}&=2p
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

These two are the same so we know the first condition is met.
{:.info}

And the second condition:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}&=-2q&#92;&#92;
\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}&=2q
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

This condition is also satisfied.
{:.info}

Notice:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
f'(z)&=2z&#92;&#92;
&=2p+2iq&#92;&#92;
&=\frac{\partial u}{\partial p}+i\frac{\partial v}{\partial p}&#92;&#92;
&=\frac{\partial v}{\partial q}-i\frac{\partial u}{\partial q}
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

The Cauchy-Riemann conditions establish the validity of this rule.
{:.info}

### Additional Example Notes
The conjugate function does not satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann conditions. This means that it is not able to be differentiated.

Consider &#92;(f(z)=\frac{1}{z}&#92;). From [the complex division operation](https://bweston6.github.io/UoL/comp116/lectures/2021/03/01/1.html#division-zudiv-v) we must rewrite this like so:

&#92;[\frac{1}{z}=\frac{\bar z}{\vert z \vert^2}=\frac{\bar z}{\left(\text{Re}(z)\right)^2+\left(\text{Im}(z)\right)^2}&#92;]

We can let &#92;(z=p+iq&#92;)

&#92;[f(p+iq)=\frac{p-iq}{p^2+q^2}=u(p,q)-iv(p,q)&#92;]

Here:

&#92;[
\begin{aligned}
u(p,q)&=\frac{p}{p^2+q^2}&#92;&#92;
v(p,q)&=\frac{-q}{p^2+q^2}
\end{aligned}
&#92;]

These two functions satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann conditions.
{:.info}
