---
title: COMP116 - Statistics & Data Analysis
tags: COMP116 Lectures
---
Experimental proof makes justifications more clear and accessible.

## Methodology
Suppose we have some algorithm which we suspect runs efficiently most of the time. We can test this using the following experimental method:

1. Run the algorithm a number of times on different data.
1. Determine the average time taken.

This raises the following questions:

* How do we **select** the data?
* **Data sizes** to use?
* **Number of tests** to perform?
* How to **present** the **results**?

## Population
This is the set of items from which object to test are chosen. It is often referred to by &#92;(\Omega&#92;).

We should have a population of **finite** size.
{:.info}

* The set forming a population may **vary** over time:
	* The students forming a year 1 module.
* The population may be fixed:
	* The permutations of a set of numbers.
* You can focus on a subset of the population.
	* This is to find how characteristics of a specific set effect the population as a whole.
	
### Sampling
You can't consider everyone in a population for the following reasons:

* The population is **too large**.
* There may be an **incomplete** set of answers.
* The responses may not be **reliable**.

This means that you need to sample a population with a random selection method.

#### Unbiased vs Biased
Each element &#92;(X\in\Omega&#92;) has a probability &#92;(P[X]&#92;) of being chosen:

&#92;[\sum&#95;&#123;X\in\Omega}P[x]=1;0\leq P[X]\leq 1&#92;]

* For all members of the population the sum of their probabilities is 1.
* Each members probability must be between 0 and 1 inclusive.

In an **unbiased** / **uniform** selection method:

&#92;[P[x]=\frac{1}{\vert\Omega\vert}&#92;]

Where &#92;(\vert\Omega\vert&#92;) is the size of the population.

Every member has the same chance of being selected.
{:.info}

#### Why Use Biased?
Giving everyone an equal chance can be misleading in practice. This can give errors in our analysis.

#### Random Variables
Random variables are a methods of associating a variable with a member of a population:

A **student** from the **1&#92;(^{\text{\bf st}}&#92;) year** has a particular **grade**.
{:.info}

&#92;[r:\Omega\rightarrow\Bbb R&#92;]

