---
title: Cliques & Network Associativity
tags: COMP324 Lectures
---
These are methods for finding important **groups** of nodes rather than individual nodes.

## Dense Subgraphs
It may be useful to obtain a dense part of the network rather than a set of nodes with high degree.

### $k$-kernel
> The $k$-kernel of a network is the largest induced sub-network with **no** node of degree less than $k$.

For example, given the following network:

```mermaid
graph TD
1 --- 12
1 --- 14
1 --- 15
1 --- 17
1 --- 23
2 --- 10
3 --- 6
3 --- 14
3 --- 23
4 --- 12
5 --- 10
6 --- 10
6 --- 11
6 --- 23
7 --- 10
9 --- 10
11 --- 14
12 --- 15
12 --- 17
15 --- 17
17 --- 23
subgraph k=3
1
12
15
17
end
```

We can find this by iterativley completing the following:

1. Search the graph for nodes that have less than $n$ neighbours.
1. Remove them from a graph and treat the result as a new graph.
1. Repeat again with the new graph until only the induce sub-network remains.

## Cliques

Clique
: A network in which every pair of nodes is joined by a link.

Maximal Clique
: In a network $G$, a subnetwork of $G$ that is a clique and that is not part of a larger clique in $G$.

If a clique has more than two members, like $\{5,6,7,8\}$ we view this as a fully connected graph between all nodes.
{:.info}

### Clique Listing
Using the Bron-Kerbosch algorithm we can get the size distribution of the largest cliques:

```
BK(R, P, X)
	if P is empty and X is empty then
		return R
	else
		// assume that P={u_1, ..., u_k}
		for i = 1 to k do
			remove u_i from P
			call BK recursively on R*, P* and X* as defined:
				R* = R ∪ {u_i}
				P* = P ∩ N(u_i)
				X* = X ∩ N(u_i)
			add u_i to X
		end for
	end if
```

where the inputs are:

* R - Current clique we are investigating
* P - Vertices that can be added
* X - Vertices that cannot be added

A reminder that the function $N(u_i)$ gives all the neighbours of $u_i$.
{:.info}

To start we give then input:

$$
\text{BK}(\emptyset, \{\text{all nodes}\},\emptyset )
$$


## Homophily

Homophily
: The tenancy to associate with others whom you perceive to be similar to yourself.

We are able to **classify** nodes in a graph given a non-trivial classification:

$$
\mathcal C = \{C_i:1\leq i \leq h\}
$$

### Measuring Homophily
The **modularity** of a network (with respect to the given partition $\mathcal C$ of its vertices) is defined as:

$$
Q=\frac1{2m}\sum_{i,j}\left(A_{i,j}-\frac{\deg i\cdot\deg j}{2m}\right)\delta\left(c(i),c(j)\right)
$$

additionally let:

$$
Q_\max=1-\frac1{2m}\sum_{i,j}\frac{\deg i\cdot\deg j}{2m}\delta\left(c(i),c(j)\right)
$$

The **assortativity coefficient** is defined as the ratio:

$$
\frac Q{Q_\max}
$$

where:

* $c(i)$ - the class of the node $i$
* $\delta(x, y)$ returns one if $x=y$ and zero otherwise.

We can calculate the assortivity coefficient using only the network links and node degrees by using the following formula:

$$
\frac Q{Q_\max}=\frac{2m\cdot2\cdot\#(\text{edges inside classes})-\sum_C\left(\sum_{i\in C}\deg i\right)^2}{2m\cdot2m-\sum_C\left(\sum_{i\in C}\deg i\right)^2}
$$

where:

* $i\in C$ - the node $i$ is in the class $C$ ($c(i)=C$).