---
title: Voronoi Diagrams
tags: COMP324 Lectures
---
Given a collection of $n$ points in space, its **Voronoi diagram** is a way of diving space in to $n$ convex regions, or **Voronoi cells**.

We generally have the following distances to work with:

* Euclidean:
	
	$$
	\text{dist}_2(X,Y)=\sqrt{(x_1-y_1)^2+(x_2-y_2)^2}
	$$
* Manhattan:
	
	$$
	\text{dist}_1(X,Y)=\mid x_1-y_1\mid +\mid x_2-y_2\mid
	$$
* Maximum:
	
	$$
	\text{dist}_{\infty}(X,Y)=\max(\mid x_1-y_1\mid,\mid x_2-y_2\mid)
	$$

## Pen & Paper Method

PaperAndPencilVoronoi($P_1,\ldots,P_n$)

```
for each i in {1, ..., n} do
	define cell(P_i) by intersecting the n - 1 bisector
	half-places h_i(P_j)
end for
```

This method is tedious to draw by hand. There are alternative methods that can be computed.
{:.warning}

## Delaunay Triangulations

1. Connect the points on the convex hell in a cycle.
1. Iteratively remove any cycle of length at least four inside the convex hull by adding arbitrary lines connecting pairs of vertices.
	
	Leave the convex hull untouched and keep it planar.
	{:.info}
1. A pair of triangles sharing an edge is bad if the sum of the angles $\alpha$ and $\gamma$ is larger than 180 degrees.

	Remove all the bad pairs of triangles by replacing the diagonal $BD$ by $AC$.
	
## Approximate

1. Given the $n$ sites $S_1,\ldots,S_n$, in a rectangular region $R$, repeatedly sample points $P$ in $R$.
1. Compute the distances $\text{dist}(P,S_i)$ and assign $P$ to the cell of minimum distance.

We can also complete the same thing using the following simpler algorithm:

1. Superimpose a grid on $R$.
1. Let $P$ denotes the centre of an arbitrary grid square. 
1. Assign $P$ to the cell of **minimum distance**.