# Meeting Minutes - 20-10-26
## Academic Sources for Data Flow

There was concern about the requirement for academic sources for the data flow topic. As these are different topics in the mark scheme we presume that sources aren't required for this topic and should be a focus of other topic such as *benefits and shortcomings*, *domain of the system*; etc. 

The mark scheme has additional information on this topic that wasn't provided in the slides which seems important.

## Different Models

The possibility of having many models with various price-points and features was discussed. We concluded that having many models would be complex for the customer so there should only be two models:

* A fully featured physical model
* A software only model for integration

## Benefits and Shortcomings

A focus on shortcomings should be a priority as to not infringe on the *what makes it new* task.

* Trust - A key shortcoming for AIs
	* You can't use it for nefarious purposes.
	* Academic references should be easy to find for this topic.
* Some things may not work without an internet connection.
	* 5G will be required away from WiFi for suitable latency.
	
## Mark Scheme and Current Drafts

The group reviewed the mark scheme and planned the assignment to more closely align with the key marking points.

We peer reviewed the current drafts for suggestions and correctness. We generally agreed on what had been written already and that there should be a greater focus on the trust shortcoming on the *benefits and shortcomings* page.