---
title: E-mail, SMTP & IMAP
tags: COMP211 Tutorials
---
There are three major components to e-mail:

* User Agents
	* Such as outlook or geary.
* Mail servers
	* Mailbox - contains incoming messages for user.
	* Mesage Queue - of outgoing messages.
	* SMTP Protocol - Between mail server to send email messages.
* The protocol: simple mail transfer protocol (SMTP)

## SMTP
The standard for this protocol is RFC 5321.

* Uses TCP on port 25.
* Direct transfer from the sending to receiving server.
* Three phases of transfer:
	* Handshaking
	* Transer of Messages
	* Closure
* Command/Response Interaction (like HTTP):
	* Commands: in ASCII.
	* Response: Status code and phrase.

### Example SMTP Request
SMTP requests are sent as multiple objects, sent in a multi-part message. The message is split based on who is responding.

```
220 EventMachine SMTP Server
```
```
HELO alice
```
```
250 Ok EventMachine SMTP Server
```
```
MAIL FROM: <sender@example.com>
```
```
250 Ok
```
```
RCPT TO: <receiver@example.org>
```
```
250 Ok
```
```
DATA
```
```
354 Send it
```
```
SUBJECT: Hello

Hi Bob, How's the weather? Alice.
.
```
```
250 Message accepted
```

The message is ended with `\r\n.\r\n`. Where `\r` is a carriage return and `\n` is a newline.
{:.info}

### Mail Message Format
SMTP is defined in RFC 531 (like HTTP). Additionally, RFC 822 defines the syntax for e-mail messages (like HTML).

An SMTP message can be split into two parts:

* Header Lines:
	* `To:`
	* `From:`
	* `Subject:`
* Body - Message with ASCII characters only.

## Mail Access Protocols
SMTP can send mail but in order to retrieve it and read the contents you must use other protocols:

* SMTP - Delivery and storage of e-mail.
* IMAP (Internet mail access protocol RFC 3501) - Messages stored on server, provides retrieval, deletion & folders of stored messages.
* HTTP - Provides web-based interfaces on top of SMTP & IMAP.