---
title: COMP122 - Interfaces
tags: COMP122 Lectures
---
Interfaces allow you to abstract the workings of your code and provide simple interfaces to the user:


## Lamp Example

```java
public interface Switchable {
	public void switchOn();
	public void switchOff();
}
```

This defines the interface type that someone can call.
{:.info}

```java
Switchable l = new Lamp();
l.switchOn();
l.switchOff();
```

This is the use for the interface.
{:.info}

```java
public class Lamp implements Switchable {
	public void switchOn() {
		// method
	}
	public void switchOff() {
		// method
	}
}
```

This is the implementation of the interface.
{:.info}

## Interfaces
In java, an interface is a specification which public  methods must exist in a class that implements it.

This is like a contract that the front and back-end programmers must adhere to.
{:.info}

* Interfaces define a **type**.
* Typically only contains constants and methods signatures.
	* Not the method bodies.
* Cannot be instantiated.
* Can be implemented by a class, which then has to contain all method bodies declared in the interface.
* Can be extended by other interfaces.
* A class can implement more than one interface.

### Extending Interfaces
A class can implement several interfaces. Such a class would have to implement all methods from all the interfaces it implements.

```java
public class Lamp implements Switchable, Pluggable {
	// Switchable methods
	// Plugable methods
}
```

An interface can itself extend one or more other interfaces:

```java
interface Dimmable extends Switchable, Plugable {
	...
}
```

This means that if you want to provide `Dimmable` then you have to provide implementations for all the methods in the other interfaces. 
{:.info}

An interface **cannot**  implement other interfaces:

```java
public interface Dimmable implements Switchable {
	...
}
```

This does not work.
{:.error}

### Implementing Multiple Interfaces in a `class`
A class can also extend from other classes while implementing interfaces:

```java
public class Lamp extends Furnature implements Switchable, Pluggable {
	// Switchable methods
	// Plugable methods
}
```

## Conventions

* Interface identifiers end in "-able":
	* `java.Lang.Comparable`
	* `java.io.Serializable`
* All interface methods are `public` and `abstract`.
* All attributes are `public`, `static` and `final`.

## Interfaces vs. Abstract Classes

| Abstract Classes | Interfaces |
| :-- | :-- |
|  Can only `extend` one superclass. | Multiple inheritance between interfaces. |
| Can `extend` any class. | Can only `extend` interfaces. | 
| May have `abstract` and concrete methods. | Only `abstract` methods. | 
| `protected` methods allowed. | Methods are `public` `abstract`. |
| No restriction on attribute modifiers. | Only `public` `static` `final` variables. |

* The purpose of abstract classes is to provide abstraction when designing type hierarchies or class hierarchies.
* Interfaces are for specifying the `public` facing services or to coordinate several groups of programmers/software.