---
title: COMP105
tags: COMP105
---
# Lecture 13-1
## Type Classes
Some functions are polymorphic, but can't be applied to any type. `+` is a good example. It can work on `float` and `integer` but not on mixed types or `Char`. The type of `+` is:

```haskell
(+) :: Num a => a -> a -> a
```

This means that `a` is a number in the definition: `a -> a -> a`.

### `Num`
`Num` is a type class:

* It restricts the type variable `a` to only be number types.
* `Word`, `Int`, `Integer`, `Float`, `Double` are all contained in `Num`.
* `Char`, `Bool`, tuples and lists are not in `Num`.

#### `Num` Sub-Classes
`Num` has two sub-classes.

`Integral` represents whole numbers and contains:

* `Word` (un-signed integers)
* `Int`
* `Integer`

`Fractional` represents rationals and contains:

* `Float`
* `Double`
* `Rational`

### `Eq`
The types in the class `Eq` are the types which can be compared with the function `==`. There are no default types which aren't equality testable but if you make your own type then you will have to add it to this class.

## Type Class Syntax
The syntax of a class type is:

```haskell
[Type class 1], [Type class 2], ...) => [Type]
```

This results in a declaration similar to the following:

```haskell
equals_two :: (Eq a, Num a) => a -> a -> Bool
equals_two a b = a + b == 2
```

This type declaration also means that if you use functions like `==` in your function then you must specify that the type is comparable with `Eq a`. If you don't then the compiler will give an error.

## The Most General Type Annotation
The most general type annotation is the one that is least restrictive. Ideally you want your type annotation to be the most general without giving an error:

```haskell
equals_two a b = a + b == 2

-- Too restrictive
equals_two :: Int -> Int -> Bool

-- Most general
equals_two :: (Eq a, Num a) => a -> a -> Bool

-- Too general (will give error)
equals_two :: a -> a -> Bool
```

---
@figure
The most general type annotation is the one which allows the most valid types
@/
---

## Numbers
In Haskell numbers, such as `10` have a **polymorphic type**:

```haskell
10 :: Num p => p
```

This means that, unless stated explicitly that numbers will be converted to the most suitable type in the class of `Num`.

You can force a number to be a particular type by using the `::` operator:

```haskell
1 :: Integer
> 1
1 :: Float
> 1.0
```

The function `fromIntegral` will take any `Integral` type and convert it into a `Num` type. This, for example would allow you to use the `/` operator on an `Integer`:

```haskell
fromIntegral (1 :: Int) / 2
> 0.5
```
### Converting Floats to Integers
Converting floats to integers is a lossy operation. This means that you shoul choose how to complete the rounding:

```haskell
ceiling 1.6
> 2

floor 1.6
> 1

truncate 1.6
> 1

round 1.6
> 2
```

## Other Type Classes
There are many other type classes in Haskell that won't be covered:

```haskell
length :: Foldable t => t a -> Int
```

This that `a` should be accepted if it is a list.

If you see any of the following as a types:

* Functor
* Foldable
* Traversable

then think **list**.

## Exercises
1. `square_area :: Num a => a -> a -> a`
1. `triangle_area :: Fractional a  => a -> a -> a`
1. `equal_heads :: Eq a => [a] -> [a] -> Bool`