---
title: COMP105
tags: COMP105
---
# Lecture 1-1
Programming languages can be split into imperative and functional. This course will focus on the functional language of Haskell.

* Imperative programs tell the computer how to compute the answer.
	* Declare variables
	* Go around a loop
	* Do the same instructions each time
* Functional programming languages follow mathematic definitions and focus on recursion. No variables are declared and no explicit loops.
	* No variables
		* No such thing as a variable in functional programming.
	* No explicit loops
		* using recursive functions.

Functional programming is a style of programming the isn't dependant on the language that is is written in. Functional programming languages are built to support this style.

## Course Focus

The course will focus on functional languages but we will compare the two styles of programming.

Haskell is a pure functional languages as you cannot program in an imperative style easily.

## Why Functional Languages are Important

1. Their usefulness is increasing
	* Multi-core systems and GPUs prefer highly parallel code which functional programs are.
2. Learning the functional style can make you a better imperative programmer.
	* Sometimes the functional style is more appropriate.
	* Many imperative languages support functional styles.
3. Functional programming is a good preparation fo a computer science education.
	* Algorithms in CS are often presented in a functional way.
	* Functional programming helps you translate the algorithms into functional code.
	* The functional paradigm is also used in the analysis of algorithms.