---
title: Auction Misbehaviour
tags: COMP315 Lectures
---

Several people may want to cheat in an acution:

* Seller
* Auctioneer
* Buyer

Sometimes the seller is also the auctioneer.
{:.info}

## Second Price Sealed Bid Cheating
Consider the following cheats:

* The auctioneer could drive up the price by faking a higher second bid.
* The seller could drive up the price by bidder themselves, an amount they expect to be second.
* Multiple bidders could collude by asking other to lower their bid.


Additionally anyone could bribe anyone else to complete these actions.
{:.info}

## First Price Sealed Bid Cheating

With this types of auction, neither the auctioneer nor seller can drive up the price.

* Some bidders could try to bribe the auctioneer.

This method is overall more resistant to cheating.
{:.success}

## Other Factors
People may change the way they bid based on the following factors:

* Expected price.
* Possibility of cheating.

and more:

### Synchrony
Some autions require all participants to be present at the same time:

Synchronous:

* Japanese Auction
* Dutch Auction
* Some kinds of English auction

Asynchronous:

* Sealed Bid
* Other kinds of English auction

In e-commerce, asynchronous auctions are easier to implement.
{:.info}

### Time
Some auctions take longer than others:

| Type | Time |
| :-- | :-- |
| Dutch | Famously quick. |
| Japanese | Can be quick. |
| English | Rather slow. |
| Sealed Bid | Variable but tend to be longer. |

### Trust
Auctions work better if the auctioneer is trusted:

* The auction should be transparent and simple.
* The implementation should not hide too much from the bidders.
	
	For example the auctioneer could read all the prices in a sealed bid auction, instead of just saying who won.
	{:.info}

### Price Information
During the auction, you may learn more about the item's value:

* Ideal agents are not affected as they know the item's worth.
* Realistic agents may have their value influenced by the current bid.

### Irrational Bids
Some auctions types can promote the following:

#### Irrationally High Bids
English auctions are good at making people overbid due to:

* Small increase increments (making it feel like you're spending less).
* Easy to underestimate other bidder's willingness to raise.

All-pay auctions also promote overbidding.

#### Irrationally Low Bids
Second-price sealed bid:

* You should bid your value instead of what you hope to pay.

Inexperienced buyers tend to bid lower than their value.
{:.info}

### Notes on these Factors
The importance of each factor depends on what is being sold and to whom:

* Time is more important for relatively low value auction.
* Synchrony is generally less of an issue for high value items.
* Irrationality and complexity are less important in B2B as you are likely to have trained bidders.
