---
title: Bots
tags: COMP315 Lectures
---

> A software **agent** that assists a user.

## User's, Services and Interfaces

* Bots act as an **interface**, connecting a **user** to a **service**.
* A **service** is anything you want to access.
* **User** might be human but could be some other software.

## Bots for E-Commerce
We will generally have to make the following decisions concerning bots:

* For customer assistance?
* For employee/company assistance?
* Can third party bots use the service?

### Customer Support

We may see the following different types:

* Dumb bots/similar to human support.
* Information only/can take actions.

When making a customer support bot we should keep the following in mind:

* High authority requires high **reliability**.
* Licensing existing bots works well for **complex bots**.
* Scripts/flowcharts for human support can often be used as a basis for a bot, especially when **less sophisticated**.

You should weigh whether the bot is really better than a FAQ or human customer support. If so you should still provide it alongside the alternatives.
{:.warning}

## Encouraging Bots

* Define an API that bots can interact with.
	* This also shows what functions you allow users to interact with.
	
Creating API documentation encourages users to use the correct endpoint for their data.

## Discouraging Bots
### robots.txt

This is a file, generally aimed at search engines, that **discourages** bots from reading certain pages or following links on pages.

A bot doesn't have to comply with `robots.txt` or robots meta tags.
{:.warning}

### Blocking Bots

* If there is a large amount of traffic from a single or small range of IPs then they can be blocked if poor behaviour is detected.

This may create false positives but this can be acceptable anyway.
{:.info}

### CAPTCHA

We can use CAPTCHA checks, like reCAPTCHA, to ensure any users are human:

* This is becoming harder with AI models that can solve modern CAPTCHA problems.