---
title: Bidding Strategy (Other Auctions)
tags: COMP315 Lectures
---
## Sealed Bid Auction Strategy
You should bid:

* Slightly more than what you expect the highest other bid to be.
* $v$ - your value of the item.
	
	In this case you will make zero profit.
	{:.warning}

You can also play mind games to make your opponents think you have a lower value of the item. This way they will bid lower in response.

* Every bid below $v$ is rationalisable.

### Second Bid Sealed Auction Strategy
You should:

* Bid your valuation $v$.

In this case you will pay the next valuation lower ($t$) than $v$ and you will make at least zero profit.

## Japanese Auction Strategy
You should always drop out when the auction hits your value $v$.

## Deterministic All Pay Sealed Bid Auction Strategy

* Any bid below the valuation $v$ is rationalisable.

With rational bidders the seller can expect to receive the value of the item in payouts, despite all paying:

* In reality most people overbid.

### Deterministic All Pay English Auction Strategy
The dollar auction is the best known example of this type:

* The item to be sold is one dollar.

Assume a minimum increase of 40¢:

* It is rationalisable to bid infinitely, provided that the bid improves the marginal.

	The **marginal** is the difference in profit from the last bid.
	{:.info}

Rationality doesn't guarantee a good outcome. You can gain arbitrarily high losses in an auction of this type.
{:.error}

## Non-deterministic All Pay Auction Strategy
The **expected outcome** in a lottery for all players, including the seller, is **zero**.

Generally this is not the case as the seller takes a profit by giving prizes worth less than the sum of the tickets.
{:.info}

In practice, some money can be made from irrationality. 