---
title: Security
tags: COMP315 Lectures
---
## CIA Triad (Our Goals)

* **C**onfidentiality - Including company secrets and customer data.
* **I**ntegrity - Keep stored data correct.
* **A**vailability - We should be able to provide the service.

## Attacks
There are two general classifications of attacks:

**Passive attacks** require only observation from attackers:

* Message Interception
* Traffic Analysis

**Active attacks** require an attacker to do something:

* Masquerade
* Denial of Service
* Message Modification (or Deletion)

### Types of Attackers
Different types of attacker have different goals, methods and resources:

| Attacker | Goal | CIA Target | Methods | Resources | Attack Types |
| :-- |:-- | :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| Bored Teenager | *lulz* | C, I & A | Unintended use of public facing components. | None | Message interception, DOS. |
| Malicious Customer | Steal/Fraud | - | Misuse of procedures. | None | - |
| Corporate Espionage | Stealing secrets | C | Quiet gaining of login details or recruiting an insider. | Considerable financial & technological. | Interception |
| Criminals | Make money from you. | C & A | Social engineering or known bugs to gain data or threaten with downtime. | Varies | Message modification, DOS. |
| Intelligence Service | Learn about your customers or the products you are selling. | C & I | Supply chain attacks, side channel attacks, physical surveillance. | All of them. | Interception, modification and masquerade. |
| Insider | May be a combination of other types. | - | - | Internal resources. | - |
| Mistakes | Accidental impacts that should be mitigated. | - | - | - | - |

## Threat Modelling
### Severity
The severity of an attack is based on three factors:

* $f$ - How often the attack will happen?
* $p$ - How likely is the attack to succeed?
* $d$ - How damaging would the attack be?

Therefore we can calculate total severity by:

$$
(f\times p)\times d
$$

### Damage
When determining damage, consider the following:

* Direct Damage:
	* Loss of revenue when you shop is done.
	* Compensation to affected customers.
	* Loss of products to fraud.
* Reputational Damage
* Legal Issues:
	* Fines
	* Loss of License.
* Loss of Competitive Advantage:
	* Leaking of trade secrets.
	* Loss of customer information.
	
### Solution
After identifying an attack and determining its severity, choose a response:

* **Prevent** by taking measures that make the attack impossible.
* **Mitigate** by reducing the harm of the attack.
* **Accept**. Often after taking other actions.

### Cost
Security measures come at a price:

* Financial cost.
* Slowing down work.
* Making things harder for your customers.
* Making work less pleasant for your employees.

If security measures are perceived as excessive, it greatly increases the risk of noncompliance.

## Security Measures
We can take the following measures to enhance our security:

1. Technology is necessary, but not sufficient:
	* Rules and procedures are the best form of security.
1. Follow relevant standards:
	* NIST Cybersecurity Framework (US)
	* Cyber Essentials (UK)
	* PCI DSS (Card Payments)
	* Insurance Standards
1. Don't have it:
	* You can be less of a target if you don't have the data (or access to it) to begin with.
1. Need to know only:
	* Anyone should only ever have access to what is essential.
	* Access can be split into read, write and physical.
1. The mind is weak:
	* Rules should be written with humans in mind.
	* Rules should be easy to follow and tolerant of failure.
1. Trust no input:
	* Always make sure that input is in the correct form before completing any sort of processing.
1. Check and recover:
	* Have procedures to detect data corruption.
	* Always recover once corruption is detected.
1. Get tested:
	* Employ a pentester to check your work.
	* Post bug bounties and react positively to found bugs to reduce the chance of people holding on to zero-days.
	
There are also some more rules for **high security** systems. They are often too onerous for typical systems:

1. Air-gaps:
	* You can only really be secure when you are not connected to the internet.
	* A one-way network may be a reasonable solution for data monitoring.
	* Procedures should be implemented for getting information across the gap safely.
1. No device is secure:
	* No device is acceptable in a high security environment, unless highly vetted.

## Authentication
We can use the following **factors** to authenticate a user by:

* Something the user **knows** (also Something the user **can do**):
	* By writing down a password you have it in multiple factors.
	* Can be changed easily.
	* Limits on what can be memorised.
	* Hard to determine whether an attacker has it.
* Something the user **has**:
	* Equivalent to a physical key.
	* Generally an object that encodes a secret.
	* Often combined with knowledge such as a pin or inherent like an image.
	* Easy to change
	* Easy to detect theft.
		* Easy to steal.
	* Need to distribute the object. 
* **Something** the user is - **Inherent** (also includes standard behaviour):
	* Usually can't be lost or forgotten.
	* Hard to steal.
	* Can't be easily changed.
		* Could change unexpectedly.
	* Can be invasive.
* **Somewhere** the user is (Location):
	* Can imply other authentication methods:
		* If you are in the office, you must have already authenticated by another means.
	* Low effort for the user.
	* Off-site location can be faked.
	* Not secure unless part of other factors.

### Multi-Factor
In low security settings, one factor is often considered enough. However for:

* Accounts involving payments.
* Accounts for employees, where more information is available.

multiple factors should be mandatory.