---
title: Bidding Strategy (English Auctions)
tags: COMP315 Lectures
---
A strategy is a description of how the bidder will behave in every possible situation.

## Best Response
Suppose there are $n$ bidders using strategies $s_1,\ldots, s_n$ where you are bidder 1:

* The outcome of the auction when everyone uses that strategy can be computed.
	* We can call the outcome $O(s_1,\ldots, s_n)$
* Your strategy $s_1$ is a best response to $s_2, \ldots, s_n$ if there is no $s'_1$ such that $O(s'_1,\ldots, s_n)$ is better for you than $O(s_1,\ldots, s_n)$.

This model doesn't account for people who change their strategies.
{:.warning}

If $sj_1$ is the best response to $s_2,\ldots, s_n$, then other might play different strategies $s'_2, \ldots, s'_n$ if you use $s_1$.

### Rationalisability
A strategy $s_1$ is rationalisable if:

1. There are strategies $s_2, \ldots, s_n$ that $s_1$ is best response to.
1. $s_2, \ldots, s_n$ are rationalisable.

Therefore, everyone is playing the best response at least one other person's strategy, given that everyone is playing a rationalisable strategy.
{:.info}

> Not every rationalisable strategy is optimal.


### Optimality
A strategy $s_1$ is optimal if it is the best response to **every** choice of strategies $s_2, \ldots, s_n$ of other bidders:

* If an optimal strategy exists you should use it.
* Otherwise default to a rationalisable one.

> Every optimal strategy is rationalisable.

## English Auction Strategy
Consider we are in an English auction with the following assumptions:

* There are exactly two bidders.
* The minimum increase is negligible.
* The item is worth $v_1$ to you.
	
	You should not bid more than $v_1$ otherwise you will be disappointed.
	{:.warning}

1. Suppose that the current standing bid $b_2$ by the other bidder and $b_2<v_1$.
1. Raise with the following inequality:
	
	$$
	b_2<b_1<v_1
	$$
	
	where $b_1$ is your new bid.
	
You can never be certain what your opponent will do. Therefore you must follow these rules as you can't be sure whether you will be outbid or not.
{:.info}