---
title: Cryptography (Not Encryption)
tags: COMP315 Lectures
---
## Key Exchange
We can use public key encryption to share a secret, such as a symmetric key.

We can also use a pre-agreed key if we have a previous secure connection.
{:.info}

### Diffie-Hellman (DH) Key Exchange
This is based on the assumption that logarithm modulo $n$ is not feasible to compute (like RSA).

The protocol to share a secret between Alice and Bob:

1. Alice and Bob publicly agree no a large prime number $p$ and a number $x$ such that $\text{ord}(x)=p-1)$ in $(\mathbb Z/p\mathbb Z)^*$.
1. Alice privately generates a secret number $a$ and computes $x^a\mod p$.
1. Bob privately generates a secret number $b$ and computes $x^b\mod p$.
1. Alice publicly sends $x^a$ to Bob and Bob publicly sends $x^b$ to Alice.
1. Alice computes $s=(x^b)^a\mod p$.
1. Bob computes $s=(x^a)^b\mod p$.

$s$ is now known to Alice and bob because $(x^a)^b=(x^b)^a$.

## Hashing
Hashing is a non-reversable function to make a key from a binary blob. Usual conditions on a hashing function $h:X\rightarrow Y$:

Efficiency
: Given $x$, it is feasible to compute $h(x)$.

Secrecy
: Given $y=h(x)$, it is not feasible to compute any $z$ such $h(z)=y$.

Collision
: It is not feasible to find any $x_1\neq x_2$ such that $h(x_1)=h(x_2)$.

We don't require correctness as we don't want to recover $x$.
{:.info}

Non-cryptographic hashes don't require secrecy or collision.
{:.info}

### Hashing Size
For a hash function, there is no requirement that the output is at least as long as the input:

* This way a very large $x$ can be turned into a pretty short hash.

### Hashing Uses
Hashing is mainly used for:

* Message integrity checks.
* Password hashing.

#### Password Hashing
To store passwords for comparison purposes, it is most secure to:

1. Generate a salt that is unique per user and service (not necessarily secret).
1. When a user sets their password compute $y=h(\text{pwd}+\text{salt})$ and store only $y$ and $\text{salt}$.
1. When a user wants to login compute $y'=h(x+\text{salt})$. If $y=y'$ then the password is correct.

Salting requires that passwords can only be attacked one at a time. You can't find what a password is from other leaked tables or by matching to other users.
{:.info}

Hashing must be completed server-side as the server must receive a password. If not an attacker could steal the database and it is no more secure than just storing plan-text passwords.

We can double hash to mitigate this and never have the plan-text password in flight.
{:.info}

#### Precedence
You can use hashes to show presidency. You could say:

> I know what the outcome of tomorrows football match. I won't spoil it but this is the hash of my prediction.

You can also accomplish this with signing.
{:.info}

#### Cryptocurrency
With a hash function, it is hard to find $x$ such that $h(x)=y$.

Finding an approximation that:

$$
h(x)\approx 0
$$

is used as *proof of work*. This is also a difficult task to do.

## Signing
We have the public key comprised of $e$ and the modulus $n$ and the private key $k$:

1. To sign a message $x$ compute $s=x^k\mod n$
1. Then post $x$ together with $s$.
1. To verify the signature compute $s^e\mod n$. We now have $(x^k)^e=x\mod n$.

To sign faster we can compute a hash of the message. We can then sign this hash.

### Authentication
By verifying the signature you can verify that the person who signed the message **was in ownership of that private key**.

You can also say that no-one has tampered with the document provided that they're **not in ownership of the private key**.

#### Identity
You can prove your identity by signing a random message:

* You mustn't sign a meaningful document if you only want to prove your identity.

We take the following method:

1. Alice privately knows the private key $k$ and posts the public key $e,n$.
1. Alice randomly generates a number $a$ and publicly sends it to bob.
1. Bob randomly generates a number $b$ and publicly sends it to Bob.
1. Alice computes $s=h(h(a)+h(b))^k\mod n$ and publicly sends it to Bob.
1. Bob verifies that $s^e=h(h(a)+h(b))\mod n$.

## Operating on Cipher-Text
Some operations are possible on the cipher-text without knowing the plain-text:

* RSA allows multiplication modulo $n$:

	Given cipher-text of $x,y$ we can compute $x\times y$ without knowing $x,y,k$.
	
	This is why we need to hash the hashes of $a$ and $b$ for identity.
	{:.info}